SVG: 3D Stereoscopic Video Generation via Denoising
Frame Matrix
Peng Dai1,2
Feitong Tan1˚ Qiangeng Xu1˚
David Futschik1
Ruofei Du1
Sean Fanello1
Xiaojuan Qi2
Yinda Zhang1
1Google
2The University of Hong Kong
Abstract
Video generation models have demonstrated great capabilities of producing impres-
sive monocular videos, however, the generation of 3D stereoscopic video remains
under-explored. We propose a pose-free and training-free approach for generating
3D stereoscopic videos using an off-the-shelf monocular video generation model.
Our method warps a generated monocular video into camera views on stereoscopic
baseline using estimated video depth, and employs a novel frame matrix video
inpainting framework. The framework leverages the video generation model to
inpaint frames observed from different timestamps and views. This effective ap-
proach generates consistent and semantically coherent stereoscopic videos without
scene optimization or model fine-tuning. Moreover, we develop a disocclusion
boundary re-injection scheme that further improves the quality of video inpainting
by alleviating the negative effects propagated from disoccluded areas in the latent
space. We validate the efficacy of our proposed method by conducting experi-
ments on videos from various generative models, including Sora [4], Lumiere [2],
WALT [8], and Zeroscope [42]. The experiments demonstrate that our method has
a significant improvement over previous methods. The code will be released at
https://daipengwa.github.io/SVG_ProjectPage/
1
Introduction
As VR/AR technology advances, the demand for creating stereoscopic content and delivering im-
mersive 3D experiences to users continues to grow. Due to visual sensitivity, binocular stereoscopic
content should feature flawless 3D and semantic consistency between both eye views, as well as
seamless temporal consistency across frames. While monocular video generation models have
been extensively researched and methods are now capable of synthesizing high-fidelity videos that
adhere to complex text prompts [4], there has not been much progress in the realm of generating
3D stereoscopic videos at the scene level. One reason for this gap lies in the substantial amount of
monocular video data that is readily available, contrasted with the scarcity of stereo video data for
training models to generate stereoscopic videos directly.
An emergent solution is to convert generated monocular videos into stereoscopic videos using novel
view synthesis [24; 27]. However, these methods usually overly rely on camera pose estimation,
which is a challenging task on its own either using SFM [39] or joint optimization [27], and as a
result tend to be unstable, particularly in dynamic scenes where cameras experience subtle motions
or when the content is dominated by dynamic objects with temporally varying appearances, both of
which are prevalent in generated videos. Consequently, these methods fail in optimizing 3D scenes
and offer low-quality solutions to the task (see Fig. 3). Moreover, these approaches are based on
reconstruction, lacking the generative ability to hallucinate occluded regions in the novel views that
do not appear in any of the remaining video frames.
˚Equal contribution
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2407.00367v1  [cs.CV]  29 Jun 2024

In this paper, we propose an alternative pose-free and training-free framework, for the sake of
robustness and generalization capability, that operates solely by exploiting inference of an off-the-
shelf video generation model [42] to generate high quality 3D stereoscopic videos. Our initial
attempt follows a typical 2D to 3D image uplifting methodology [14] and extends it into the video
domain. Specifically, we first generate a monocular video as the left view, which is then reprojected
into the right view using per-frame estimated monocular depths [46], where we apply temporal-
spatial smoothing to improve the consistency of the estimated depth. Subsequently, we leverage an
off-the-shelf video generation model’s [42] ability to generate natural videos, by adding noise and
denoising the warped video frames to inpaint the disoccluded regions, inspired by diffusion-based
image inpainting [1].
However, this naive pipeline does not produce appealing results: inpainting the right-view video
frames independently, without referencing the left view, typically generates semantically mismatched
content. To address this problem, we propose a novel representation, called the frame matrix, which
contains frame sequences observed from a number of viewpoints evenly distributed along the baseline
between two eyes. The frame sequences along the view direction (rows of the matrix) form videos
with camera motion, while the frame sequences along the time direction (columns of the matrix)
form videos with scene motions (see Fig. 1 second column). Since the video diffusion model has
video prior for both scene and camera motions, we propose to jointly update the entire frame matrix
from both directions. In each denoising step, we use resample techniques [28] by alternatively
denoising frame sequences along the view and the time directions. Finally, we obtain a semantically
consistent and temporally smooth 3D stereoscopic video by taking the leftmost and the rightmost
frame sequences to represent the left-eye view and the right-eye view, respectively.
Furthermore, we note that the inevitable resolution downsampling operation in most video generation
models with latent encoding [4; 2; 42; 8] is detrimental to the video inpainting task. During encoding,
the dark pixels created by disocclusion can degrade the features near the disocclusion boundary,
leading to undesirable artifacts (see Fig. 5). Instead of following the inpainting scheme proposed
in previous work [1], which encodes the latent feature only once, we iteratively update both the
disoccluded regions in the image space and the latent feature map with generated content during the
diffusion process. This approach re-injects the generated content into the disocclusion boundary,
which mitigates the negative impact of dark disocclusion and effectively prevents the artifacts.
To validate the efficacy of our proposed method, we generate stereoscopic video from monocular
videos generated by Sora [4], Lumiere [2], WALT [8], and Zeroscope [42]. Both qualitative and
quantitative evaluations suggest that our approach outperforms other baselines in 3D stereoscopic
video generation. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We design a novel pipeline to generate 3D stereoscopic videos. Unlike previous work, our
method does not need camera pose estimation or fine-tuning on specific datasets.
• We propose a novel frame matrix representation that regularizes the diffusion-based video
inpainting to generate semantically consistent and temporally smooth content.
• We propose a re-injection scheme that drastically reduces the negative influence of disoc-
cluded regions in latent space and produces high-quality results.
• We conduct comprehensive experiments that show the superiority of our approach over
previous methods for 3D stereoscopic video generation.
2
Related Work
Video Generation. Video generation [42; 4; 2; 8; 9; 11; 13; 40] has achieved tremendous progress
since the advent of the diffusion model [12]. Taking into account the dataset requirements and
scarcity of tagged videos, a prominent approach for video generation is to extend pre-trained image
generation models [37; 38; 36] by inserting additional temporal layers and then fine-tuning them on
video data [7; 3; 44]. To further improve the compute efficiency and enable long clip processing,
WALT [8] and Lumiere [2] proposed to compress the video in both the temporal and spatial dimen-
sions. More recently, Sora [4] adopted a transformer diffusion architecture [34] and was trained on
large-scale video datasets to produce impressive video generation results. Different from previous
video generation models focusing on producing higher-quality and longer monocular videos, our
method orthogonally explores the possibility of leveraging pre-trained video generation models for
stereoscopic 3D video generation.
2

Novel View Synthesis. Great progress has been made for novel view synthesis in both static and
dynamic scenes captured by single or multiple cameras [30; 47; 20; 17; 31]. Mildenhall et al. [30]
proposed to encode the static scene into neural radiance fields (NeRF), which were then used for novel
view synthesis through volume rendering. For more challenging scenes with dynamic content, follow-
up works additionally optimized a deformation field [32; 15; 33] or scene flow fields [23] to handle
the motion of dynamic objects. Instead of encoding the scene into a NeRF, DynIBaR [24] leveraged
nearby frames for rendering novel view images, and dynamic objects were handled by optimized
motion fields. Different from methods requiring pre-computed camera poses, RoDynRF [27] jointly
optimized the NeRF and camera poses from scratch. Concurrently, FVS [19] achieves novel view
video synthesis using a plane-based scene representation. Although these approaches produce high-
quality renderings, they are limited to scenes where the camera pose can be accurately estimated and
have limited synthesis capability. In contrast, we design a method that explicitly avoids having to
estimate camera poses and possesses the ability to hallucinate unseen content.
3D Content Creation and Inpainting. Automated 3D content creation [14; 5; 6; 48] is another
related area, with emerging approaches such as inpainting [11] or multi-view generators [26; 43].
Recently, Text2Room [14] proposed creating a 3D room by warping an image into novel views and
using a text-guided inpainter to deal with disocclusions. WonderJourney [48] made this process
automatic by including a large language model in the loop. Similar to creating static scenes, we could
use pretrained video inpainter [50; 22] for dynamic 3D content creation, however, these models suffer
from generalization problems in creating high-quality, consistent 3D content. Lastly, Deep3D [45] is
trained using 3D movies, with the goal of converting 2D videos into stereoscopic videos. However,
the training data is not publicly available and it lacks the flexibility to modify videos for creative
purposes, such as different stereo baselines. In this paper, we explore the possibilities of using video
generation models for 3D video creation without training on specific, hard-to-obtain datasets.
3
Stereoscopic Video Generation
Conditioned on a text prompt or a single image c, our method aims to generate 3D stereoscopic
video tXl, Xru, consisting of two monocular sequences. The most straightforward way is to use a
diffusion-based generation model G:
tXl, Xru “ Gptϵt|t “ 1, ..., Tu, cq,
(1)
where ϵt „ Np0, Iq is the sampled noise at step t. The generated stereoscopic videos should possess
the following characteristics: First, the appearance and semantics between the left eye view Xl and
right eye view Xr should be consistent and be temporally stable. Second, the stereo effect should be
prominent and immersive. Last, the generated content should be diverse and controllable with the
given conditioning.
However, training a G that can directly generate stereo videos tXl, Xru with the desired properties
requires a vast dataset of stereo videos with diverse content. Due to the scarcity of such data, we
propose a training-free approach that relies on an off-the-shelf depth estimator [46] and a diffusion-
based monocular video generation model G such as Zeroscope [42]. We first generate a monocular
video for one eye using a video diffusion model [42; 8; 4; 2] (Eq. 2), then obtain the other video
view by conditioning on the first video. To automatically preserve 3D consistency, we implement
this conditioning by estimating depth dl for the left video and warp its content to obtain the right
view sequence XlÑr with disocclusion masks Mr (Eq. 3) according to the stereoscopic baseline.
Then, we use G again to inpaint the disoccluded parts by denoising inpainting process [1; 28] (Eq. 4),
obtaining the other eye view video Xr.
Xl “ Gptϵt|t “ 1, ..., Tu, cq,
(2)
XlÑr, Mr “ WarplÑrpXl, dlq,
(3)
Xr “ Gptϵt|t “ 1, ..., Tu, c, XlÑr, Mrq.
(4)
In Sec. 3.1, we describe the video depth warping. In Sec. 3.2, we introduce the frame matrix
representation for the video inpainting. Our denoising frame matrix drastically improves the semantic
similarity between Xl and Xr and helps preserve temporal smoothness. Last but not least, a
disocclusion boundary re-injection mechanism is introduced to further improve the inpainting quality
in Sec. 3.3. An overview of our method is displayed in Fig. 1.
3

Figure 1: Overview – Top: Given a text prompt, our method first uses a video generation model to
generate a monocular video, which is warped (using estimated depth) into pre-defined camera views
to form a frame matrix with disocclusion masks M. Then, the disoccluded regions are inpainted by
denoising the frame sequences within the frame matrix. After denoising, we select the leftmost and the
rightmost columns and decode them to obtain a 3D stereoscopic video. Bottom: Details of denoising
frame matrix. We initialize the latent matrix zT as a random noise map. For each noise level, we
extend the resampling mechanism [16; 28] to alternatively denoise temporal (column) sequences and
spatial (row) sequences N times. Each time, row or column sequences are denoised and inpainted
(see Fig.2). By denoising along both spatial and temporal directions, we obtain an inpainted latent z0
which can be decoded into temporally smooth and semantically consistent sequences.
3.1
Monocular Video Depth Warping
The depth estimation model [46] is applied to predict all frames’ depth values, which will be smoothed
to produce more consistent video depths. Specifically, we utilize the estimated optic flows [41] to
align consecutive depth frames. The outliers in predicted depths will be suppressed by convolving
with a Gaussian kernel along the time axis. After obtaining RGB-D frames, we can warp them
into target camera views where disoccluded regions appear. In addition, the warped images usually
contain isolated pixels, and the foreground and background are entangled, which jeopardizes video
quality [5]. To handle these problems, we follow Dai et al. [5] to project points into multi-plane
images [51], then remove isolated pixels and cracks and finally obtain a noisy-points-free image. (See
supplemental material for details).
3.2
Video Inpainting with Frame Matrix
The inpainting pipeline plays a key role in ensuring spatial/semantic and temporal consistency. While
image inpainting approaches [1; 28] provide a reasonable baseline, the results lack temporal and
spatial stability. Therefore, we introduce a Frame Matrix representation, which addresses both issues.
Single Video Denoising Inpainting
Inspired by RePaint [28], we extend the diffusion-based image
inpainting to video inpainting. We use the video generation model G (i.e., Zeroscope [42]) as our
inpainting tool, which is a latent diffusion model consisting of a VAE encoder E, a decoder D and a
latent denoiser tϵθ, Σθu. First, the warped video is fed into the VAE encoder to obtain video latent
features zknown
0
“ EpXlÑrq. Then, we resize the image disocclusion masks Mr to the resolution of
the latent and obtain latent disocclusion masks m. During the denoising process, we start from a
random noisy latent map zT „ Np0, Iq. For each subsequent step t, we sample a new intermediate
noisy latent map from z0 (Eq. 5), denoises the latent map from the last step zt (Eq. 6) and combine
them with m to obtain the zt´1 (Eq. 7). We visualize the following steps in Fig.2 (b):
zknown
t´1
„ N
`?¯αtzknown
0
, p1 ´ ¯αtqI
˘
,
(5)
zunknown
t´1
„ N
ˆ
1
?1 ´ βt
ˆ
zt ´
βt
?1 ´ ¯αt
ϵθpzt, c, tq
˙
, Σθpzt, c, tq
˙
,
(6)
zt´1 “ m d zknown
t´1
` p1 ´ mq d zunknown
t´1
,
(7)
4

Figure 2: Denosing Inpainting. This figure visualizes the operations in the purple box of Fig.1. (a)
We re-inject the generated content from a denoised latent rz0 to update zknown
0
and reduce its feature
corruption on the disocclusion boundary. (b) A noisy latent zt is denoised to zunknown
t´1
. We take its
disoccluded region and combine it with the unoccluded region of zknown
0
.
where ¯αt and βt denote the total noise variance and one step noise variance at t, respectively;
ϵθpzt, c, tq and Σθpzt, c, tq are predicted noise and variance for noisy latent map at t ´ 1 step. Finally,
we can obtain the inpainted right view sequence Xr by decoding the denoised latent Xr “ Dpz0q.
By applying the above video inpainting scheme for the right view, we implement Eq. 4 and suc-
cessfully hallucinate the disoccluded (unknown) regions while preserving the unoccluded (known)
regions. The video diffusion model also ensures temporal smoothness. However, the inpainted
content on the right view usually lacks semantic consistency w.r.t. the left view, as shown in the
third column of Fig. 4. This is because we only condition on the left view by depth warping, while
dropping the conditioning during inpainting.
Frame Matrix Representation.
We propose a novel representation–frame matrix, which targets
consistent dynamic content generation across space and time. As shown in Fig. 1 top, it is a matrix
consisting of multiple frames, where each row represents frames observed from different camera
poses at the same time stamp, and each column is a video recorded by a fixed camera at different
time stamps. Consequently, the frame matrix can be defined as:
X ”
„
Xp:,0q
. . .
Xp:,V q
ȷ
”
«
Xp0,:q
...
XpS,:q
ff
where S and V are the largest indices of time steps and views, respectively. A view sequence (row)
Xps,:q forms a video with camera motions, while a time sequence (column) Xp:,vq forms a video with
time-varying scene motions. Since the video diffusion model can denoise a sequence to a temporally
and semantically consistent video, jointly denoise the rows and columns can ensure consistency
spatially and temporally. Finally, we can obtain a 3D stereoscopic video by taking the leftmost and
the rightmost time sequences Xp:,0q, Xp:,V q.
Constructing Frame Matrix.
We evenly add V camera views distributed along the baseline
between the two eyes with the same orientation of the reference view.
Then, we warp the
refence video (the 0th column) based on depth (Sec. 3.1) into these views and obtain Xwarp ”
rXp:,0q, Xp:,0Ñ1q, ..., Xp:,0ÑV qs with a disocclusion masks matrix M.
Denoising Frame Matrix.
Similar to single video sequence inpainting, we encode frame matrix
into a latent frame matrix zknown
0
“ EpXwarpq, and resize M to obtain latent disocclusion map m.
We also initialize zT „ Np0, Iq. As shown in Fig.1 (Bottom), for each noise level, we extend the
resampling mechanism [28] to alternatively denoise column sequences and row sequences N times.
Each time, row or column sequences are denoised following Eq. 5-7 and we add back noise between
every resampling iteration:
zt „ Np
a
1 ´ βt´1zt´1, βt´1Iq.
(8)
Please refer to Sec.A in the supplemental material. By denoising along these two directions alterna-
tively, the spatial and temporal sequences will proceed toward a harmonic state in the end.
3.3
Disocclusion Boundary Re-Injection
Since most video generation models are using latent diffusion, the disoccluded dark regions of Xwarp
will be propagated beyond the latent mask m during VAE encoding (e.g., Zeroscope downsamples
5

by 8ˆ), leading to defective latent features on zknown
0
’s disocclusion boundary. This would lead to
artifacts in the final results (Fig. 5 left).
We propose to re-inject the denoised information in the disoccluded regions to improve the latents on
this boundary. Specifically, we predict the denoised latent features [12], which are decoded into a
denoised video (Eq. 9). Then, we replace its unoccluded regions with warped pixels to form a video
that is faithful to the reference view but with better disocclusion pixels. By encoding this video, we
can get a updated zknown
0
(Eq. 10) which alleviates corruption on the boundary:
rX0 “ Dprz0q, where rz0 “
1
?¯αt
`
zt ´
?
1 ´ ¯αtϵθpzt, c, tq
˘
,
(9)
zknown
0
“ E
´
M d Xwarp ` p1 ´ Mq d rX0
¯
.
(10)
After this, this improved zknown
0
can be used in Eq. 5 for the next iteration.
4
Experiments
Datasets.
To validate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct experiments using a variety of
recent video generation models, including Sora [4], Lumiere [2], WALT [8], and Zeroscope [42].
These models produce diverse left videos from a wide range of input text prompts, covering subjects
such as humans, animals, buildings, and imaginary content.
Implementation Details.
To ensure the stereo effect appears realistic, we normalize the up-to-scale
depth values predicted by the depth estimation model [46] to a range of (1, 10) and set the baseline
between left and right views to 0.08. The frame matrix is constructed by evenly placing 8 cameras
between the left and right views, with each camera corresponding to a warped video sequence. Due to
the limitations of the zeroscope model, we currently conduct experiments on video sequences with 16
frames. Following the approach of RePaint [28], we employ DDPM [12] as our denoising scheduler
with 1000 total time steps T and 50 denoising steps, resulting in 20 time step jumps per denoising
step. During the initial 25 denoising steps (50 to 25), we resample 8 times at each step to establish
a reasonable structure in disoccluded regions. For the remaining steps, we reduce resampling to 4
times and denoise only the right view for improved efficiency while generating stereoscopic videos.
We run experiments on one A6000 GPU.
Baselines.
We compare our method with two families of approaches: video inpainting, and novel
view synthesis from a monocular video. For video inpainting approaches, we generate the right
view in the same manner as our method using depth-guided warping. We then apply state-of-the-art
methods ProPainter [50] and E2FGVI [22] to inpaint the right views. For novel view synthesis
methods, we compare our results with RoDynRF [27] and DynIBaR [24], which optimize scene
representations relying on camera poses. To ensure a fair comparison, given the differing 3D scales
between their reconstructed scenes and our estimated depth, we select the baseline for rendering the
right view by matching the median disparity of foreground regions in the resulting disparity map
to that of our methods. We are also aware of approaches trained on dedicated datasets that directly
produce the right-view given the left-view like Deep3D [45]. However it does not generalize well to
the generated video, especially those in non-realistic styles, and the comparison could be found in
supplemental material.
4.1
Qualitative Results
Qualitative Comparisons. We show qualitative comparisons in Fig. 3. Previous video inpainting
methods suffer from a common problem – the generated content in disoccluded regions is blurry, such
as the knight’s arm, horse’s tail, and corgi’s face, presumably because that these methods are trained
on limited datasets. On the other hand, novel view synthesis methods suffer from unstable camera
pose estimation (e.g., DynIBaR fails on some videos). Though good at reconstructing visible content
from the monocular video, they are typically poor at synthesizing novel contents in the disoccluded
regions that are not observed in any frames (e.g., ghost effect near the boundary in the RoDynRF
result on the corgi example). In contrast, our approach takes advantage of generative capability of
video diffusion models trained on massive scale datasets and does not require camera poses of the
input video as inputs, thereby generating high-quality content in various types of scenarios (last
row of Fig. 3) and consistently outperforms baseline methods. Additionally, we visualize the stereo
6

Figure 3: Qualitative comparisons. The first row shows left-view images. The video inpainting
methods E2FGVI and ProPainter tend to generate blurry content in disoccluded regions, such as
knight’s arm and corgi’s face. RoDynRF lacks the generation ability, thus content on the right side of
the corgi case is poor. DynIBaR’s results contain artifacts, and it requires camera poses as inputs,
which failed in some scenarios. On the contrary, our method takes advantages of video generation
models and is pose-free, thus generates high-quality content in different scenarios.
7

effects of different methods on the corgi case using a stereo depth estimator [21], which predicts
disparity values from the stereo images. As shown in Fig. 12, RoDynRF and DynIBaR exhibit less
depth variation, indicating weaker stereo effects. This occurs when the camera is wrong and training
process overfits the training views, resulting in a sub-optimal 3D representation.
4.2
Quantitative Results
In this part, we show quantitative comparisons with other baselines. We primarily rely on a dedicatedly
designed user study to evaluate the quality of generated stereoscopic video on various quality axes.
We also provide an objective metric to measure the semantic similarity between the left and right
views using pre-trained CLIP models.
Human Perception. To assess the perceived visual quality, we conducted a user study with 20
participants (9 female, age µ “ 33, σ “ 6.2q. On a VR headset, each participant viewed and
evaluated five generated videos (out of 20 in total) by all five methods on stereo effect, temporal
consistency, image quality, and overall experience using a 7-point Likert scale [25]. A total of 435
evaluations (DynIBaR failed to generate 13 videos) were counterbalanced and randomly shuffled. We
also included a training session to eliminate novelty effects. Results are summarized in Table 3, with
details in the supplemental material. Our method outperforms other baselines on measured metrics.
E2FGVI
ProPainter
RoDynRF
DynIBaR
Ours
Stereo Effect Ò
4.79 (1.08)
4.81 (1.13)
2.97 (1.34)
1.86 (1.25)
5.24 (0.94)
Temporal Consistency Ò
4.74 (1.33)
4.74 (1.22)
3.35 (1.66)
1.89 (1.33)
5.15 (1.22)
Image Quality Ò
4.42 (1.27)
4.38 (1.28)
2.84 (1.60)
1.67 (1.07)
5.12 (1.33)
Overall Experience Ò
4.67 (1.04)
4.66 (1.09)
2.92 (1.43)
1.72 (1.06)
5.35 (0.99)
Table 1: Quantitative comparisons. This table reports results of human perception experiments
as mean (std). Our method outperforms other baselines on all metrics. Kruskal-Wallis tests [18]
reveal significant effects of group on all metrics (χ2 ą 13.3, p ă 0.001˚˚˚). Post-hoc tests using
Mann-Whitney tests [29] with Bonferroni correction reveal significant effects (p ă 0.05˚, |r| ą 0.1)
for each pairwise comparison, except E2FGVI vs. ProPainters yield comparable results.
Semantic Consistency. We additionally check the semantic consistency between the left and the
right view. We use pre-trained CLIP model [35] to extract features for both left views and right views
of a stereoscopic video, and then calculate the feature distance following Sun et al. [49] to obtain the
semantic consistency score. In Table 2, our method attains the best semantic consistency (96.44) over
other baselines.
4.3
Ablation Studies
Effect of Frame Matrix. In Fig. 4, we showcase that using frame matrix benefits semantic consistency
between the left and right views. Without using frame matrix, the disoccluded regions in warped
images can be inpainted with unconstrained contents, which are likely to be inconsistent with the left
view given impressive generative capability of the diffusion model, such as the hair of the man and
the head of the horse. This is also revealed in Table 2, where CLIP Score drops from 96.44 to 95.81
when disabling frame matrix. Thanks to constraints from other frames within the frame matrix, our
method generates both reasonable foreground and background contents in the disoccluded regions.
More studies of frame matrix are included in Sec.D of the supplemental material.
Effects of Disocclusion Boundary Re-Injection.
In Fig. 5, we demonstrate the importance of
updating unoccluded latent features for high-quality results. Without this update, the disoccluded
region is inpainted with unnatural textures that don’t blend well with the surrounding content. With
the update, the inpainted content blends seamlessly. This is reflected quantitatively in Table 2, where
the CLIP Score drops from 96.44 to 95.60 when unoccluded feature updates are discarded.
Method
E2FGVI
ProPainter
RoDynRF
DynIBaR
Ours - FM
Ours - DBR
Ours
CLIP Ò
94.34
95.29
96.03
93.24
95.81
95.60
96.44
Table 2: Semantic consistency score. We show the semantic consistency using CLIP feature
similarity [10] between the left and right view. Our method outperforms previous methods as well as
ablated cases.
8

Reference
W/o frame matrix
Warped
With frame matrix
Figure 4: Semantically consistent content generation. The reference frames are warped into the
target view with disoccluded regions set to be black. Without using frame matrix, the generated
content does not match the reference, such as the book and the face of horse. With frame matrix, the
inpainted contents are more semantically reasonable.
W/o Disocclusion Boundary Re-Injection
With Disocclusion Boundary Re-Injection
Figure 5: Disocclusion Boundary Re-injection. Without disocclusion boundary re-injection, the
inpainted images usually contain artifacts. Bottom-left corner shows the warped image.
Different Stereo Baselines.
Fig. 6 shows increasing the stereo baseline makes inpainting harder
and degrades stereoscopic video quality, as reflected by CLIP score. Our method is resilient to
larger baselines, failing beyond 20cm (depth normalized to 1.0-10.0m). This range is sufficient for
generating 3D stereoscopic video for most people, given typical inter-pupillary distances of 5-7cm.
7cm
23cm
15cm
32cm
Semantic consistency
Figure 6: Result with different stereo baselines. Unnatural artifacts begin to appear as the baseline
expands. Our method performs well for stereoscopic video generation where baseline is usually less
than 7cm.
5
Limitations
Although our results demonstrate the possibility of generating 3D stereoscopic videos using pre-
trained video diffusion models, challenges remain. For one, we did not study longer videos because
the architecture of a typical video diffusion model supports generating videos only a couple of
seconds long. One possible solution for long 3D stereoscopic video generation is to use stronger
foundational models, such as Sora [4]. Alternatively, we could gradually generate longer videos by
overlapping frames of shorter videos. Additionally, our method is dependent on a depth estimation
model [46], which may fail, e.g., when dealing with thin structures.
6
Conclusion
We proposed a complete system for stereoscopic video generation, using a video diffusion model
and our frame matrix inpainting scheme. Given the fast adoption of video generation, our approach
bridges the gap between current ability to generate monocular and stereoscopic videos. In particular,
we showed that our frame matrix formulation significantly advances the state-of-the-art for generative
stereoscopic video, and can be adopted by existing and future video diffusion models.
9

References
[1] Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–11, 2023.
[2] Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat, Junhwa
Hur, Yuanzhen Li, Tomer Michaeli, et al. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for video generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12945, 2024.
[3] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and
Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 22563–
22575, 2023.
[4] Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe Taylor,
Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video generation models as
world simulators. 2024.
[5] Peng Dai, Yinda Zhang, Zhuwen Li, Shuaicheng Liu, and Bing Zeng. Neural point cloud rendering via
multi-plane projection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 7830–7839, 2020.
[6] Quankai Gao, Qiangeng Xu, Zhe Cao, Ben Mildenhall, Wenchao Ma, Le Chen, Danhang Tang, and
Ulrich Neumann. Gaussianflow: Splatting gaussian dynamics for 4d content creation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.12365, 2024.
[7] Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animated-
iff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.04725, 2023.
[8] Agrim Gupta, Lijun Yu, Kihyuk Sohn, Xiuye Gu, Meera Hahn, Li Fei-Fei, Irfan Essa, Lu Jiang, and José
Lezama. Photorealistic video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06662, 2023.
[9] William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible
diffusion modeling of long videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27953–27965,
2022.
[10] Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. CLIPScore: a reference-free
evaluation metric for image captioning. In EMNLP, 2021.
[11] Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition video
generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
[12] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[13] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet.
Video diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8633–8646, 2022.
[14] Lukas Höllein, Ang Cao, Andrew Owens, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. Text2room: Extracting
textured 3d meshes from 2d text-to-image models.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 7909–7920, 2023.
[15] Yi-Hua Huang, Yang-Tian Sun, Ziyi Yang, Xiaoyang Lyu, Yan-Pei Cao, and Xiaojuan Qi. Sc-gs: Sparse-
controlled gaussian splatting for editable dynamic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14937, 2023.
[16] Animesh Karnewar, Andrea Vedaldi, David Novotny, and Niloy J Mitra. Holodiffusion: Training a 3d
diffusion model using 2d images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 18423–18433, 2023.
[17] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for
real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4):1–14, 2023.
[18] William H Kruskal and W Allen Wallis. Use of Ranks in One-criterion Variance Analysis. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 47(260):583–621, 1952.
[19] Yao-Chih Lee, Zhoutong Zhang, Kevin Blackburn-Matzen, Simon Niklaus, Jianming Zhang, Jia-Bin
Huang, and Feng Liu. Fast view synthesis of casual videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02135, 2023.
10

[20] Tianye Li, Mira Slavcheva, Michael Zollhoefer, Simon Green, Christoph Lassner, Changil Kim, Tanner
Schmidt, Steven Lovegrove, Michael Goesele, Richard Newcombe, et al. Neural 3d video synthesis
from multi-view video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5521–5531, 2022.
[21] Zhaoshuo Li, Xingtong Liu, Nathan Drenkow, Andy Ding, Francis X. Creighton, Russell H. Taylor, and
Mathias Unberath. Revisiting stereo depth estimation from a sequence-to-sequence perspective with
transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pages 6197–6206, October 2021.
[22] Zhen Li, Cheng-Ze Lu, Jianhua Qin, Chun-Le Guo, and Ming-Ming Cheng. Towards an end-to-end
framework for flow-guided video inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 17562–17571, 2022.
[23] Zhengqi Li, Simon Niklaus, Noah Snavely, and Oliver Wang. Neural scene flow fields for space-time
view synthesis of dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 6498–6508, 2021.
[24] Zhengqi Li, Qianqian Wang, Forrester Cole, Richard Tucker, and Noah Snavely. Dynibar: Neural dynamic
image-based rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 4273–4284, 2023.
[25] Rensis Likert. A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 1932.
[26] Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick. Zero-
1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 9298–9309, 2023.
[27] Yu-Lun Liu, Chen Gao, Andreas Meuleman, Hung-Yu Tseng, Ayush Saraf, Changil Kim, Yung-Yu Chuang,
Johannes Kopf, and Jia-Bin Huang. Robust dynamic radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 13–23, 2023.
[28] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 11461–11471, 2022.
[29] Henry B Mann and Donald R Whitney. On a Test of Whether One of Two Random Variables Is Stochasti-
cally Larger Than the Other. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pages 50–60, 1947.
[30] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren
Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications of the ACM,
65(1):99–106, 2021.
[31] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives
with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–15, 2022.
[32] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M Seitz, and
Ricardo Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 5865–5874, 2021.
[33] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman,
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M Seitz. Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for topologi-
cally varying neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13228, 2021.
[34] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 4195–4205, 2023.
[35] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR,
2021.
[36] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional
image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
[37] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
11

[38] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-
image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
[39] Johannes Lutz Schönberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-from-motion revisited. In Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[40] Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang,
Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
[41] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Computer
Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II
16, pages 402–419. Springer, 2020.
[42] Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Modelscope
text-to-video technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06571, 2023.
[43] Lezhong Wang, Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Mark Bo Jensen, and Siavash Arjomand Bigdeli. Stereodiffusion:
Training-free stereo image generation using latent diffusion models, 2024.
[44] Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Yufei Shi, Wynne Hsu, Ying
Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for
text-to-video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 7623–7633, 2023.
[45] Junyuan Xie, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. Deep3d: Fully automatic 2d-to-3d video conversion with deep
convolutional neural networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14, pages 842–857. Springer, 2016.
[46] Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Xiaogang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth anything:
Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10891, 2024.
[47] Jae Shin Yoon, Kihwan Kim, Orazio Gallo, Hyun Soo Park, and Jan Kautz. Novel view synthesis of
dynamic scenes with globally coherent depths from a monocular camera. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5336–5345, 2020.
[48] Hong-Xing Yu, Haoyi Duan, Junhwa Hur, Kyle Sargent, Michael Rubinstein, William T Freeman, Forrester
Cole, Deqing Sun, Noah Snavely, Jiajun Wu, et al. Wonderjourney: Going from anywhere to everywhere.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03884, 2023.
[49] SUN Zhengwentai. clip-score: CLIP Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/taited/clip-score,
March 2023. Version 0.1.1.
[50] Shangchen Zhou, Chongyi Li, Kelvin CK Chan, and Chen Change Loy. Propainter: Improving propagation
and transformer for video inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 10477–10486, 2023.
[51] Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo magnification:
Learning view synthesis using multiplane images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09817, 2018.
12

Appendix
In the supplementary sections, we provide more studies and details of the proposed method.
• In sec. A, we provide a pseudocode describing our frame matrix inpainting.
• In sec. B, it includes details of data preprocessing in handling warping-related artifacts.
• In sec. C, we include details of human perception experiments and provide additional comparisons
with Deep3D.
• In sec. D, it contains more studies of frame matrix, including different trajectories in frame matrix and
consistency across different views.
• In sec. E, we display more results in different scenarios.
• In sec. F, we show the effectiveness of our data preprocessing.
More video results and comparisons can be found in the supplementary webpage (.html).
A
Algorithm Details
In the algorithm below, we present the detailed steps to denoise the Frame Matrix with spatial-temporal
resampling, where we set µθpzt, c, tq “
1
?1´βt pzt ´
βt
?1´¯αt ϵθpzt, c, tqq, following DDPM[12].
Algorithm 1 Frame Matrix Inpainting
Input: zT „ Np0, Iq: Initial noisy latent maps
z0: Initial clean latent maps
for t “ T, ..., 1 do
for n “ 1, ..., N do
if n is odd then
Denoise time sequences tzps,:qt|s “ 1, ..., Su:
for s “ 0, .., S do
zknown
ps,:qt´1 „ Np?¯αtzps,:q0, p1 ´ ¯αtqIq
zunknown
ps,:qt´1 „ Npµθpzps,:qt, c, tq, Σθpzps,:qt, c, tqq
zps,:qt´1 “ mps,:q d zknown
ps,:qt´1 ` p1 ´ mps,:qq d zunknown
ps,:qt´1
end for
else
Denoise view sequences tzp:,vqt|v “ 1, ..., V u:
for v “ 0, .., V do
zknown
p:,vqt´1 „ Np?¯αtzp:,vq0, p1 ´ ¯αtqIq
zunknown
p:,vqt´1 „ Npµθpzp:,vqt, c, tq, Σθpzp:,vqt, c, tqq
zp:,vqt´1 “ mp:,vq d zknown
p:,vqt´1 ` p1 ´ mp:,vqq d zunknown
p:,vqt´1
end for
end if
Add back one noise step for resampling:
zt „ Np
a
1 ´ βt´1zt´1, βt´1Iq
end for
end for
B
Details of Data Preprocessing
Multi-Plane projection. Given RGB-D images, we warp them into a target camera view. Instead of projecting
all pixels onto one image plane and handling occlusions using z-buffer, we divide the camera view space into
multi-plane images tIstep0
1
, ..., Istep0
N
u (N=4 in this paper) according to near and far depths, then each pixel is
projected onto the image plane closest to it. We use tM step0
1
, ..., M step0
N
u to indicate valid pixel positions on
each image plane. By doing this, the foreground and background are separated in different planes temporarily,
which makes dealing with artifacts (i.e., isolated points and entangled foreground and background content in
Fig. 11 left) easier.
Remove isolated points. Due to the inaccuracy of depth values around image boundaries, these pixels are
warped into wrong positions leading to isolated pixels (see red box in Fig. 11 left). Intuitively, isolated pixels
13

View 1 
View 2 
View 3 
𝑇!
𝑇"
𝑇#
𝑇!
𝑇"
𝑇#
Figure 7: Videos in frame matrix. In both cases, each column is a generated video in a camera, and
each row represents generated frames in different cameras at a specific timestamp.
have no or very few neighbors, thus we detect isolated pixels based on this observation. Specifically, we
apply convolution on each mask plane M step0
i
using a 3 ˆ 3 kernel, after which isolated pixels are empirically
determined where values after convolution are less than 0.5. We remove these isolated pixels on both RGB and
mask planes to obtain new tIstep1
1
, ..., Istep1
N
u and tM step1
1
, ..., M step1
N
u.
Handle foreground and background entanglement. Since the depth image is not a watertight representation,
the warped image usually contains small cracks/holes that confuse foreground and background content. For
example, the gray road can be seen through the dog’s ear in Fig. 11 left. Similar to handling isolated pixels,
we use a 3 ˆ 3 Gaussian kernel to perform convolution on each mask plane M step1
i
. When there are cracks,
the values after convolution will be less than 1. In this paper, positions with no pixel values (0 in Mi) but with
greater values than 0.2 after convolution are considered cracks. We fill these cracks via interpolating nearby valid
pixels in each image plane and obtain new multi-plane images tIstep2
1
, ..., Istep2
N
u and tM step2
1
, ..., M step2
N
u.
After handling artifacts in each image plane, all image planes are blended into one image (e.g., Fig. 11 ours left)
in a back-to-front order using Eq. 11, where the content of front plane blocks content belongings to the plane at
the back.
14

𝑇!
𝑇"
View 1 
View 2 
View 3 
Figure 8: Videos in frame matrix constructed using a spiral trajectory. Warped and generated
frames in different cameras at different timestamps.
Warped
Ours
W/o FM
View1
View2
View3
Figure 9: Consistency. The content is inconsistent when each view is generated independently.
Frame matrix benefits the consistency of our results across different views. Please note the dragon’s
wing.
15

Left view
Right view
Warped image
Figure 10: More results. We display more generated results in different scenarios.
W/o data preprocessing
Ours
Figure 11: Data preprocessing. Left: without handling isolated points and entangled foreground
and background (the gray road can be seen through the dog’s ear) in warped images, these artifacts
remain in the final results. Right: our results have no artifacts.
I “ I ˆ p1 ´ M step2
i
q ` Istep2
i
ˆ M step2
i
, for i in rN, ..., 1s.
(11)
16

RoDynRF
DynIBaR
E2FGVI
ProPainter
Ours
Figure 12: Disparities. We visualize stereo effects by predicting disparity values from stereo
images [21].
t
t+1
Left view
Right view
t (warped)
t (inpainted)
Figure 13: Ability to utilize unobserved content. Left view: two consecutive images observed by
the left view. Right view: the warped and inpainted images at time t. Note that the black region is
inpainted with the character “R”, matching the characters in the second image at time t+1.
C
Details of Human Perception Study
Participants. To evaluate the perceived quality of the generated stereoscopic videos, we recruited 20 participants
(9 females) at least 18 years old (µ “ 33, σ “ 6.2) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision at an anonymous
institution via email lists and group communication software. The majority of participants had some experience
with virtual reality. None of the participants was involved with this project prior to the user study.
Study setup. The study was conducted in a quiet meeting room with a commercial VR headset as the primary
apparatus. The study software is implemented in Unity 2023.3.0b and we render stereoscopic videos with
custom shaders on a 1.8m ˆ 1.0m quad that is three meters away from the participant in the world space, which
occupies approximately 33.4 degrees in width and 18.92 degrees in height initially. Users have the freedom to
move themselves within the meeting room to examine the stereoscopic video. This setup allowed participants to
experience the stereoscopic videos in virtual reality settings and provided a controlled environment for the user
study.
Study protocol. Each study session consists of a demographics interview with consent forms, a training session,
and an evaluation session. To eliminate the ordering effect, we randomly counterbalanced all five methods for
each video and assigned five random videos (out of 20 videos) with five conditions to each participant. However,
since DynIBaR method failed to generate 13 videos, we collected a total of 5 ˆ 5 ˆ 20 ´ 13 ˆ 5 “ 435
evaluations from 20 participants, resulting in 100 human evaluations for each method except DynIBaR. During
the training session, we randomly picked a video that was outside of the assigned videos to the participant
and asked the participant to rate the stereoscopic effect, temporal consistency, graphical quality, and overall
experience on a 7-point Likert scale [25], with 1 being the lowest, 7 being the highest, and 4 being the average.
This procedure helps eliminate the novelty effect and calibrate the user’s rating before the formal evaluation
session. In the formal evaluation, we prompted the participant with the question like “How would you like to
rate the stereoscopic effect of the video on a 7-point scale, with 1 being the lowest, 7 being the highest, and 4
being the average?” and asked the user the reason behind the rating.
Metrics.. We evaluate the perceived quality of generated stereo videos based on three key aspects: 1. Stereo
Effect. This refers to the perception of depth achieved by presenting slightly different images to each eye.
A strong stereo effect makes objects appear closer or farther away, enhancing the 3D experience. Example
questions: "How strong was the 3D effect in the video?" and "Which video felt more immersive due to the
3D effect?" 2. Temporal Consistency. This aspect assesses the smoothness of scene motion and the absence
Left view
Right view
Disparity
Figure 14: Results of Deep3D. Deep3D does not provide the function to change the stereo baseline,
and the vague disparity map on the right side demonstrates its weak stereo effects.
17

of artifacts such as jitter or ghosting over time. Example questions: "How smooth and natural did the motion
of objects appear?" and "Did you notice any flickering, jumpiness, or distortions in the video?" 3. Graphical
Quality. This evaluates the overall visual appeal of the video, including the quality of details, textures, lighting,
and color fidelity. Example questions: "How would you rate the visual quality of the video?" and "Which video
had more detailed and realistic textures?"
Study results. Overall, despite the missing data points for the DynIBaR method in some videos, Kruskal-
Wallis tests [18] reveals significant effects of group on all metrics respectively (χ2 ą 13.3, p ă 0.01): with
stereo effect χ2 “ 186.3, p ă 0.001, temporal consistency χ2 “ 121.3, p ă 0.001, graphical quality χ2 “
153.2, p ă 0.001, and overall experience χ2 “ 192.9, p ă 0.001. We further performed post-hoc tests using
Mann-Whitney tests [29] with Bonferroni correction, which revealed significant effects (p ă 0.05, |r| ą 0.1)
for each pairwise comparison, except E2FGVI vs. ProPainters. Specifically, for Ours vs. E2FGVI, p “ 0.002 on
stereo effect, p “ 0.030 on temporal consistency, p ă 0.001 on graphical quality and overall experience. For
Ours vs. ProPainter, p “ 0.004 on stereo effect, p “ 0.017 on temporal consistency, p ă 0.001 on graphical
quality and overall experience.
Study findings. Our results suggest that our methods achieve significantly better perceived stereoscopic effect
than all other methods, while improvement in graphical quality and overall experience is more evident over
stereoscopic effect; and stereo effect more evident over temporal consistency. During the study, we also observed
many positive comments about our methods like “the contour is more clear”, “the graphics are sharper with
fewer artifacts”; however, we also observed negative or neutral feedback like “some part really works and some
parts don’t: one side of the turtle face is wrong”, and “I see no difference (on the faces)” from two participants.
This suggests future research to investigate holistic perceptual consistency in stereoscopic videos and finetune
models for special subjects like human beings.
Additional User Study on Ours vs. Deep3D.
Despite that we did not include Deep3D in the design of our initial user study, we further conducted a human
evaluation between Ours and Deep3D across the same metrics with a total of 190 random evaluations over 20
random videos, following the same protocol. Pairwise Mann-Whitney tests with Bonferroni correction reveal
significant effects on stereo effect (p ă 0.001), overall experience (p ă 0.001), and temporal consistency
pp “ 0.015q. We found our method outperforms Deep3D in stereo effect and overall experience, yet falling
slightly short in temporal consistency.
Similar to Fig.4 in main paper, we visualize Deep3D’s disparity map in Fig. 14. The vague disparity map in
the third column demonstrates weak stereo effects, which matches the statistic results in Table 3. By manually
modifying the disparity map or changing the stereo baseline, 3D effects may become apparent. However,
Deep3D does not support these functions.
Deep3D
Ours
p-value
|r| (effect size)
Stereo Effect Ò
2.29 (1.63)
5.29 (1.09)
< 0.001 ˚˚˚
0.60 (large)
Temporal Consistency Ò
5.37 (1.23)
5.06 (1.25)
0.015 ˚
0.49 (medium)
Image Quality Ò
5.27 (1.17)
5.12 (1.19)
0.103
0.10 (small)
Overall Experience Ò
3.68 (1.36)
5.08 (1.09)
< 0.001 ˚˚˚
0.57 (large)
Table 3: Quantitative comparisons. This table reports results of human perception experiments
as mean (std) between Deeph3D and Ours. Our method outperforms Deeph3D in stereo effect
and overall experience, yet falls slightly short in temporal consistency. Mann-Whitney tests with
Bonferroni correction reveals significant effects on stereo effect (p ă 0.001, Z “ ´8.24), overall
experience (p ă 0.001, Z “ ´7.92), and temporal consistency pp “ 0.015, Z “ ´6.72q.
D
More Results of Frame Matrix
Other trajectories in frame matrix. In main paper, we show generated 3D left and right views. Here, we
additionally show the results of other trajectories. In Fig. 7, we selectively display frames generated within the
frame matrix at different timestamps (3 out of 16) in different camera views (3 out of 8). From the results, both
foreground and background content are coherent across different frames. Moreover, instead of constructing
frame matrix using cameras moving from left to right, we alternatively move the camera following a spiral
trajectory. In Fig. 8 first and third rows, we selectively show the warped images in different camera views (3 out
of 16), where disocclusions appear around the plane. Under each warped image, we display the corresponding
image with disocclusions filled.
Consistency. In Fig. 9, the first row is warped images under different camera views. We generate each view
independently and show results in the second row, where the content is not consistent across different views,
18

such as the dragon’s wing. With the help of the frame matrix, which also regularizes generation in the direction
of camera motion, our results in the third row are more consistent.
E
More Results of Stereoscopic Videos
More cases. In this part, more generated results are displayed in Fig. 10. The proposed method works on
different scenarios, such as the beautiful church, imaginary scenes, and ships in the storm where the whole scene
is dynamic. The high-quality generated results in Fig. 10 right column demonstrate the generalization ability of
the proposed method.
Ability to utilize temporal context for inpainting. Our method is able to harmonize image contents between
different temporal frames during inpainting and thus enhance temporal consistency. Figure 13 shows one
example. When inpainting the right-view frame at t, our method successfully creates content that is consistent
with the left-view frame at t ` 1 (see the generated character “R” in the disoccluded region). Note that such
consistency is maintained automatically thanks to frame matrix based denoising, since all temporal frames are
taken into account.
F
More Ablation Studies
Effects of Data Preprocessing. In Fig. 11 left, obvious artifacts are in warped images, such as isolated points
and cracks where the foreground ear is entangled with the background gray road, and these artifacts remain in
the final generated results. On the contrary, Fig. 11 right shows our results, which are artifacts-free after applying
the proposed data preprocessing.
19
