Physics-Driven Diffusion Models for Impact Sound Synthesis from Videos
Kun Su1*
Kaizhi Qian2
Eli Shlizerman1
Antonio Torralba3
Chuang Gan2,4
1University of Washington
2MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3MIT
4UMass Amherst
Abstract
Modeling sounds emitted from physical object interac-
tions is critical for immersive perceptual experiences in real
and virtual worlds. Traditional methods of impact sound
synthesis use physics simulation to obtain a set of physics
parameters that could represent and synthesize the sound.
However, they require fine details of both the object geome-
tries and impact locations, which are rarely available in
the real world and can not be applied to synthesize impact
sounds from common videos. On the other hand, existing
video-driven deep learning-based approaches could only
capture the weak correspondence between visual content
and impact sounds since they lack of physics knowledge. In
this work, we propose a physics-driven diffusion model that
can synthesize high-fidelity impact sound for a silent video
clip. In addition to the video content, we propose to use ad-
ditional physics priors to guide the impact sound synthesis
procedure. The physics priors include both physics parame-
ters that are directly estimated from noisy real-world impact
sound examples without sophisticated setup and learned
residual parameters that interpret the sound environment
via neural networks. We further implement a novel diffusion
model with specific training and inference strategies to com-
bine physics priors and visual information for impact sound
synthesis. Experimental results show that our model outper-
forms several existing systems in generating realistic impact
sounds. Lastly, the physics-based representations are fully
interpretable and transparent, thus allowing us to perform
sound editing flexibly. We encourage the readers visit our
project page 1 to watch demo videos with the audio turned
on to experience the result.
1. Introduction
Automatic sound effect production has become demand-
ing for virtual reality, video games, animation, and movies.
Traditional movie production heavily relies on talented Foley
artists to record many sound samples in advance and man-
*Work done while interning at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
1https://sukun1045.github.io/video-physics-sound-
diffusion/
Figure 1. The physics-driven diffusion model takes physics priors
and video input as conditions to synthesize high-fidelity impact
sound. Please also see the supplementary video and materials with
sample results.
ually perform laborious editing to fit the recorded sounds
to visual content. Though we could obtain a satisfactory
sound experience at the cinema, it is labor-intensive and
challenging to scale up the sound effects generation of vari-
ous complex physical interactions.
Recently, much progress has been made in automatic
sound synthesis, which can be divided into two main cate-
gories. The first category is physics-based modal synthesis
methods [38, 39, 53], which are often used for simulating
sounds triggered by various types of object interactions. Al-
though the synthesized sounds can reflect the differences
between various interactions and the geometry property of
the objects, such approaches require a sophisticated designed
environment to perform physics simulation and compute a
set of physics parameters for sound synthesis. It is, therefore,
impractical to scale up for a complicated scene because of
the time-consuming parameter selection procedure. On the
other hand, due to the availability of a significant amount
of impact sound videos in the wild, training deep learning
models for impact sound synthesis turns out to be a promis-
ing direction. Indeed, several works have shown promising
results in various audio-visual applications [67]. Unfortu-
nately, most existing video-driven neural sound synthesis
methods [7,66] apply end-to-end black box model training
and lack of physics knowledge which plays a significant role
in modeling impact sound because a minor change in the
impact location could exert a significant difference in the
sound generation process. As a result, these methods are
prone to learning an average or smooth audio representa-
tion that contains artifacts, which usually leads to generating
arXiv:2303.16897v3  [cs.CV]  8 Jul 2023

unfaithful sound.
In this work, we aim to address the problem of auto-
matic impact sound synthesis from video input. The main
challenge for the learning-based approach is the weak cor-
respondence between visual and audio domains since the
impact sounds are sensitive to the undergoing physics. With-
out further physics knowledge, generating high-fidelity im-
pact sounds from videos alone is insufficient. Inspired by
physics-based sound synthesis methods using a set of physics
mode parameters to represent and re-synthesize impact
sounds [9,43,52], we design a physics prior that could con-
tain sufficient physics information to serve as a conditional
signal to guide the deep generative model synthesizes impact
sounds from videos. However, since we could not perform
physics simulation on raw video data to acquire precise
physics parameters, we explored estimating and predicting
physics priors from sounds in videos. We found that such
physics priors significantly improve the quality of synthe-
sized impact sounds. For deep generative models, recent
successes in image generation such as DALL-E 2 and Ima-
gen [46] show that Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPM) outperform GANs in terms of fidelity and diversity,
and its training process is usually with less instability and
mode collapse issues. While the idea of the denoising pro-
cess is naturally fitted with sound signals, it is unclear how
video input and physics priors could jointly condition the
DDPM and synthesize impact sounds.
To address all these challenges, we propose a novel sys-
tem for impact sound synthesis from videos. The system in-
cludes two main stages. In the first stage, we encode physics
knowledge of the sound using physics priors, including es-
timated physical parameters using signal processing tech-
niques and learned residual parameters interpreting the sound
environment via neural networks. In the second stage, we
formulate and design a DDPM model conditioned on visual
input and physics priors to generate a spectrogram of impact
sounds. Since the physics priors are extracted from the audio
samples, they become unavailable at the inference stage. To
solve this problem, we propose a novel inference pipeline to
use test video features to query a physics latent feature from
the training set as guidance to synthesize impact sounds on
unseen videos. Since the video input is unseen, we can still
generate novel impact sounds from the diffusion model even
if we reuse the training set’s physics knowledge. In summary,
our main contributions to this work are:
• We propose novel physics priors to provide physics
knowledge to impact sound synthesis, including estimated
physics parameters from raw audio and learned residual
parameters approximating the sound environment.
• We design a physics-driven diffusion model with different
training and inference pipeline for impact sound synthesis
from videos. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first
work to synthesize impact sounds from videos using the
diffusion model.
• Our approach outperforms existing methods on both quan-
titative and qualitative metrics for impact sound synthe-
sis. The transparent and interpretable properties of physics
priors unlock the possibility of interesting sound editing
applications such as controllable impact sound synthesis.
2. Related Work
2.1. Sound Synthesis from Videos
Sound synthesis has been an ongoing research theme
with a long history in audio research. Traditional approaches
mainly use linear modal synthesis to generate rigid body
sounds [53]. While such methods could produce sounds
reflecting the properties of impact sound objects such as
the geometry difference, it is often the case that the simu-
lation and engineering tuning on the initial parameters for
the virtual object materials in the modal analysis is time-
consuming. Suppose we are under a more complicated scene
with many different sounding materials; the traditional ap-
proach can quickly become prohibitively intractable [43]. In
recent years, deep learning approaches have been developed
for sound synthesis. Owens et al. [40] investigated predicting
the sound emitted by interacting in the wild objects using a
wood drumstick. However, instead of directly using LSTM
to generate sound, they first predict sound features and then
performed an exemplar-based retrieval algorithm. Instead
of performing retrieval, our work directly generates the im-
pact sounds. DiffImpact [9] proposed a fully differentiable
model for rigid objects’ impact sounds based on physical
principles. In addition to impact sound, a conditional genera-
tive adversarial network is proposed for cross-modal genera-
tion on music performances collected in a lab environment
by Chen et al. [5]. Moreover, natural sounds are explored
by Zhou et al. [66] who introduced a SampleRNN-based
method to directly predict audio waveform from Youtube
videos data but the number of sound categories is limited to
ten. Next, several works attempt to generate aligned audio
to input videos via a perceptual loss [4] and information
bottleneck [7]. More recently, music generation from visual
input has also achieved various attentions [11,49,50].
2.2. Audio-visual learning
In recent years, methods for multi-modality learning
have shown significance in learning joint representation for
downstream tasks [42], and unlocked novel cross-modal ap-
plications such as visual captioning [31, 62], visual ques-
tion answering (VQA) [8, 57], vision language naviga-
tion [1], spoken question answering (SQA) [6,58], healthcare
AI [29, 32,59–61], etc. In this work, we are in the field of
audio-visual learning, which deals with exploring and lever-
aging both audio and video correlation at the same time. For
example, earlier work from Owens et al. [41] tried using

clustered sound to learn visual representations from unla-
beled video data, and similarly, Aytar et al. [3] leveraged
the scene to learn the audio representations. Later, [2] in-
vestigated audio-visual joint learning the visual by training
a visual-audio correspondence task. More recently, several
works have also explored sound source localization in im-
ages or videos in addition to the audio-visual representa-
tions [20,24,47]. Such works include a lot of applications
such as biometric matching [36], visually-guided sound
source separation [12, 16, 55, 64], understanding physical
scene via multi-modal [13], auditory vehicle tracking [15],
multi-modal action recognition [17, 33, 34], audio-visual
event localization [51], audio-visual co-segmentation [45],
audio inpainting [65], and audio-visual embodied naviga-
tion [14].
2.3. Diffusion Model
The recently explored diffusion probabilistic models
(DPMs) [48] have served as a powerful generative back-
bone that achieves promising results in various generative
applications [10,21,22,26,27,35,37], outperforming GANs
in terms of fidelity and diversity. More intriguing, the train-
ing process is usually with less instability and mode collapse
issues. Compared to the unconditional case, conditional gen-
eration is usually applied in more concrete and practical
cross-modality scenarios. Most existing DPM-based condi-
tional synthesis works [10,19] learn the connection between
the conditioning and the generated data implicitly by adding
a prior to the variational lower bound. The above methods
mostly focus on image applications, while audio is usually
different in its temporal dependencies. Recently, there are
several works that have explored to apply diffusion models
to text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis [23,25]. Unlike the task
of text-to-speech synthesis, which contains a strong corre-
lation between phonemes and speech, the correspondences
between impact sounds and videos are weak. Therefore it is
non-trivial to directly apply a conditional diffusion model
to impact sound synthesis from videos. In this work, we
found that only video condition is insufficient to synthesize
high-fidelity impact sounds and additionally apply physics
priors significantly improve the results. Moreover, due to
the difficulty of predicting physics priors from video, we
propose different training and testing strategies that could
benefit the information of physics priors but also synthesize
new impact sounds from the video input.
3. Method
Our method includes two main components: (a) physics
priors reconstruction from sound (shown in Fig. 2), and (b)
a physics-driven diffusion model for impact sound synthesis
(shown in Fig. 3). We first show how we can acquire physics
priors from sounds In (a). Then in (b), we use reconstructed
physics priors as additional information to the video input
and guide the diffusion model to learn impact sound synthe-
sis. Since no sound is available during the test time, we use
different training and inference strategies to keep the benefit
of physics priors and generate novel impact sounds.
3.1. Reconstruct Physics Priors From Sound
We aim to reconstruct physics from sound. There are two
modules: 1) the physics parameters estimation extracting
modes parameters from audio waveform, and 2) the residual
parameters prediction learning to encode the environment
information such as background noise and reverberation
using neural networks.
Physics Parameters Estimation. The standard linear modal
synthesis technique is frequently used for modeling physics-
based sound synthesis. The displacement x in such a system
can be computed with a linear equation described as follows:
  M \ D do t  { x} + C\Dot {x} + Kx = F,
(1)
where F represents the force, M represents the mass, C
represents the damping, and K represents the stiffness. With
such a linear system, we can solve the generalized eigenvalue
problem KU = ΛMU and decouple it into the following
form:
 \ Ddo t  {q } +  ( \ a lpha I + \beta \Lambda )\Dot {q} + \Lambda q = U^T F
(2)
where Λ represents the diagonal matrix that contains eigen-
values of the system, U represents the eigenvectors which
can transform x into the bases of decoupled deformation q
by matrix multiplication x = Uq.
After solving the decoupled system, we will obtain a set
of modes that can be simply expressed as damped sinusoidal
waves. The i-th mode can be expressed by:
  q _i = p_ i e^{-\la m bda _i t} \sin (2\pi f_i t + \theta _i)
(3)
where fi is the frequency of the mode, λi is the decaying
rate, pi is the excited power, and θi is the initial phase. It is
also common to represent qi under the decibel scale and we
have
  q _i = 10^{({p_ i - \lamb d a _i t})/20} \sin (2\pi f_i t + \theta _i). \label {syn}
(4)
The frequency, power, and decay rate together define the
physics parameter feature ϕ of mode i: ϕ = (fi, pi, λi) and
we ignore θi since we assume the object is initially at rest
and struck at t = 0 and therefore it is usually treated as zero
in the estimation process [43].
Given a recorded audio waveform s ∈RT , from which
we first estimate physics parameters including a set of
damped sinusoids with constant frequencies, powers, and de-
cay rates. We first compute the log-spectrogram magnitude
S ∈RD×N of the audio by short-time-Fourier-transform

Figure 2. Reconstruction of physics priors by two components: 1) We estimate a set of physics parameters (frequency, power, and decay rate)
via signal processing techniques. 2) We predict residual parameters representing the environment by a transformer encoder. A reconstruction
loss is applied to optimize all trainable modules.
(STFT), where D is the number of frequency bins and N is
the number of frames. To capture sufficient physics parame-
ters, we set the number of modes to be equal to the number
of frequency bins. Within the range of each frequency bin,
we identify the peak frequency f from the fast Fourier trans-
form (FFT) magnitude result of the whole audio segment.
Next, we extract the magnitude at the first frame in the spec-
trogram to be the initial power p. Finally, we compute the
decay time λ for the mode according to the temporal bin
when it reaches the silence (−80dB). At this point, we obtain
D modes physics parameters {(fi, pi, λi)}D
i=1 and we can
re-synthesize an audio waveform ˆs using equation 4.
Residual Parameters Prediction. While the estimated
modes capture most of the components of the impact sound
generated by physical object interactions, the recorded au-
dio in the wild has complicated residual components such
as background noise and reverberation dependent on the
sound environment which is critical for a real and immersive
perceptual experience. Here we propose a learning-based
approach to model such residual parameters. We approxi-
mate the sound environment component with exponentially
decaying filtered noise similar to [9]. We first randomly gen-
erate a Gaussian white noise N(0, 1) signal and perform a
band-pass filter (BPF) to split it into M bands. Then, for
each band m, the residual component is formulated as
  R_m = 10^{(-\gamma t)/20}\text {BPF}(\mathcal {N}(0, 1))_m
(5)
The accumulated residual components R is a weighted sum
of subband residual components
  
R
 
= \
sum ^M_{m = 1} w_m R_m,
(6)
where wm is the weight coefficient of band m residual com-
ponent. Given the log-spectrogram S ∈RD×N as input, we
use a transformer-based encoder to encode each frame of
the S. The output features are then averaged and two linear
projections are used to estimate γ ∈RM and w ∈RM. We
minimize the error between ˆs+R and s by a multi-resolution
STFT loss Lmr-stft(ˆs + R, s) which has been shown effec-
tive in modeling audio signals in the time domain [56]. By
estimating physics parameters and predicting residual pa-
rameters, we obtain the physics priors and it is ready to be a
useful condition to guide the impact sound synthesis model
to generate high-fidelity sounds from videos.
3.2. Physics-Driven Diffusion Models
With the physics priors and video inputs, we propose
a conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DDPM) for impact sound synthesis. Our model performs a
reverse diffusion process to guide the noise distribution to a
spectrogram distribution corresponding to the input physics
priors and video content. We encode all physics and residual
parameters as a latent feature embedding with multi-layer
perceptron (MLPs). The resulting physics latent vector is
denoted by µ. For video inputs, given a sequence of RGB
frames, we use temporal-shift-module (TSM) [30] to effi-
ciently extract visual features, which are then average pooled
to compute a single visual latent representation ν.
We show our physics-driven diffusion model for sound
synthesis in Fig. 3. The main component is a diffusion for-
ward process that adds Gaussian noise N(0, I) at time steps
t = 0, ..., T to a spectrogram x with variance scale β. We
can use a scheduler to change the variance scale at each time
step to have β1, β2, ..., βT [25]. We denote the spectrogram
at diffusion time step t as xt. Given the spectrogram at time

Figure 3. Overview of the physics-driven diffusion model for impact sound synthesis from videos. (left) During training, we reconstruct
physics priors from audio samples and encode them into a physics latent. Besides, we use a visual encoder to extract visual latent from the
video input. We apply these two latents as conditional inputs to the U-Net spectrogram denoiser. (right) During testing, we extract the visual
latent from the test video and use it to query a physics latent from the key-value pairs of visual and physics latents in the training set. Finally,
the physics and visual latents are used as conditional inputs to the denoiser and the denoiser iteratively generates the spectrogram.
step t −1 as xt−1, physics latent µ, and visual latent ν, the
explicit diffusion process for spectrogram at time step t can
be written as q(xt|xt−1, µ, ν). Since the complete diffusion
process that takes x0 to xT conditioned on µ and ν is a
Markov process, we can factorize it into a sequence of mul-
tiplication QT
t=1 q(xt|xt−1). To generate a spectrogram, we
need the reverse process that aims to recover a spectrogram
from Gaussian noise. The reverse process can be defined
as the conditional distribution pθ(x0:T −1|xT , µ, ν), and ac-
cording to Markov chain property, it can be factorized into
multiple transitions as follows:
  p_{\ thet a } (x_ 0 , .. .
,
 
x_{
T-1} | x_T,  \ mu , \nu ) = \prod _{t=1}^T p_{\theta }(x_{t-1} | x_t , \mu , \nu ).
(7)
Given the diffusion time-step with physics latent and vi-
sual latent conditions, a spectrogram is recovered from
the latent variables by applying the reverse transitions
pθ(xt−1|xt, µ, ν). Considering the spectrogram distribution
as q(x0|µ, ν), we aim to maximize the log-likelihood of the
spectrogram by learning a model distribution pθ(x0|µ, ν)
obtained from the reverse process to approximate q(x0|µ, ν).
Since it is common that pθ(x0|µ, ν) is computationally in-
tractable, we follow the parameterization trick in [21,25] to
calculate the variational lower bound of the log-likelihood.
Specifically, the training objective of the diffusion model
is L1 loss function between the noise ϵ ∼N(0, I) and the
diffusion model output fθ described as follows:
  \
m
in _ {\theta }||  \ ep silon - f_{\theta }(h(x_0, \epsilon ), t, \mu , \nu ) ||_1,
(8)
where h(x0, ϵ) =
q
ˆβtx0 +
q
1 −ˆβtϵ, and ˆβt = Qt
t=1 1 −
βt.
3.3. Training and Inference
During training, we use physics priors extracted from
the audio waveform as an additional condition to guide the
model to learning correspondence between video inputs and
impact sounds. However, since the ground truth sound clip
is unavailable during inference, we could not obtain the cor-
responding physics priors for the video input as we did in
the training stage. Therefore, we propose a new inference
pipeline to allow us to preserve the benefit of physics priors.
To achieve this goal, we construct key-value pairs for visual
and physics latents in our training sets. At the inference stage,
we feed the testing video input and acquire the visual latent
vector νtest. We then take νtest as a query feature and find the
key in training data by computing the Euclidean distance be-
tween the test video latent νtest and all training video latents
{νtrain
j
}J
j=1. Given the key νtrain
j
, we then use the value µtrain
j
as our test physics latent ˆµtest. Once we have both visual
latent νtest and physics latent ˆµtest, the model reverses the
noisy spectrogram by first predicting the added noise at each
forward iteration to get model output fθ(xt, t, ˆµtest, νtest) and
then removes the noise by the following:
  x_ {
t
-1 }  =
 \f r
ac
 
{ 1 }{\
sqrt {1 - \beta _t}}(x_t - \frac {\beta _t}{\sqrt {1 - \hat {\beta }_t}}f_{\theta }(x_t, t, \hat {\mu }^{\text {test}}, \nu ^{\text {test}})) + \eta _t \epsilon _ t,
(9)
where ˆβt = Qt
t=1 1 −βt, ϵt ∼N(0, I), η = σ
r
1−ˆβt−1
1−ˆβt βt,
and σ is a temperature scaling factor of the variance [25].
After iterative sampling over all of the time steps, we can
obtain the final spectrogram distribution pθ(x0|ˆµtest, νtest). It
is worth noting that while we use the physics latent from
the training set, we can still generate novel sound since the
diffusion model also takes additional visual features as input.

4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset
To evaluate our physics-driven diffusion models and make
comparison to other approaches, we use the Greatest Hits
dataset [40] in which people interact with physical objects
by hitting and scratching materials with a drumstick, com-
prising 46,577 total actions in 977 videos. Human annotators
labeled the actions with material labels and the time stamps
of the impact sound. According to the dataset annotation
assumption that the time between two consecutive object
sounds is at least 0.25 second, we segment all audios into
0.25 second clips based on the data annotation for training
and testing. We use the pre-defined train/test split for all
experiments.
4.2. Implementation Details
We use Pytorch to implement all models in our method.
For physics parameter estimation, all audio waveforms are
in 44.1Khz and we compute log-scaled spectrograms with
2048 window size and 256 hop size, leading to a 1025 × 44
spectrogram for each impact sound. Then we estimate 1025
modes parameters from the spectrogram as described in the
Sec 3.1. For residual parameter prediction, the transformer
encoder is a 4-layer transformer encoder with 4 attention
heads. The residual weights and decay rate dimensions are
both 100. In the physics-driven diffusion model, we feed
22 video frames centered at the impact event to the video
encoder which is a ResNet-50 model with TSM [30] to
efficiently handle the temporal information. The physics
encoder consists of five parallel MLPs which take each of
physics priors as input and project into lower-dimension
feature vectors. The outputs are concatenated together into a
256-dim physics latent vector µ. The spectrogram denoiser
is an Unet architecture, which is constructed as a spatial
downsampling pass followed by a spatial upsampling pass
with skip connections to the downsampling pass activation.
We use Griffin-Lim algorithm to convert the spectrogram to
the final audio waveform [18]. We use AdamW optimizer
to train all models on a A6000 GPU with a batch size of 16
until convergence. The initial learning rate is set to 5e −4,
and it gradually decreases by a factor of 0.95.
4.3. Baselines
We compare our physics-driven diffusion model against
various state-of-the-art systems. For fair comparison, we use
the same video features extracted by TSM [30].
• ConvNet-based Model: With a sequence video features,
we first up-sampled them to have the same number of
frames as the spectrogram. Then we perform a Unet ar-
chitecture to convert video features to spectrogram. Such a
architecture has shown successful results in spectrogram-
based music generation [54].
• Transformer-based Model: We implement a conditional
Transformer Network which has shown promising results
in Text-to-Speech [28]. Instead of using text as condition,
here we use the extracted video features.
• Video conditioned Diffusion model: We also compare our
approach to two video conditioned spectrogram diffusion
model variants. In the first setup, we do not include the
physics priors and keep all other settings the same.
• Video + Class Label conditioned Diffusion model: In the
second variant, we provide a class-label of the impact sound
material as an additional condition to the video features.
All other settings are the same as ours.
• Video + Other Audio Features Diffusion model: To show
the importance of physics latents, we replace the physics
latent with spectrogram/mfcc latent by extracting spectro-
gram/mfcc features from the raw audio and pass them to a
transformer encoder similar to the one used in physics pa-
rameters reconstruction, and then we apply average pooling
to obtain the latent vector. During testing, we still use vi-
sual features to query the corresponding spectrogram/mfcc
latent in the training set and synthesize the final results.
4.4. Evaluation Metrics
We use four different metrics to automatically assess both
the fidelity and relevance of the generated samples. For auto-
matic evaluation purpose, we train an impact sound object
material classifier using the labels in Great Hits Dataset. The
classifier is a ResNet-50 convolutional-based neural network
and we use the spectrogram as input to train the classifier.
• Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) is used for evaluating
the quality of generated impact sound spectrograms. The
FID score evaluates the distance between the distribution
of synthesized spectrograms and the spectrograms in the
test set. To build the distribution, we extract the features
before the impact sound classification layer.
• Kernel Inception Distance (KID) is calculated via maxi-
mum mean discrepancy (MMD). Again, we extract features
from synthesized and real impact sounds. The MMD is cal-
culated over a number of subsets to both get the mean and
standard deviation of KID.
• KL Divergence is used to individually compute the dis-
tance between output distributions of synthesized and
ground truth features since FID and KID mainly rely on
the distribution of a collection of samples.
• Recognition accuracy is used to evaluate if the quality of
generated impact sound samples can fool the classifier.
4.5. Results
Quantitative evaluation results are shown in Table 1. Our
proposed physics-driven diffusion model outperforms all
other methods across all metrics. It is worth noting that
without physics priors, using video features alone as con-
dition to the spectrogram denoiser is not sufficient to gen-
erate high fidelity sounds. While this could be improved

Model\Metric
FID ↓
KID (mean, std)↓
KL Div. ↓
Recog. Acc (%) ↑
ConvNet-based
43.50
0.053, 0.013
4.65
51.69
Transformer-based
34.35
0.036, 0.015
3.13
62.86
Video Diffusion
54.57
0.054, 0.014
2.77
69.94
Video + Class label Diffusion
31.82
0.026, 0.021
2.38
72.02
Video + MFCC Diffusion
40.21
0.037, 0.010
2.84
67.87
Video + Spec Diffusion
28.77
0.016, 0.009
2.55
70.46
Video + Physics Diffusion (Ours)
26.20
0.010, 0.008
2.04
74.09
Table 1. Quantitative evaluations for different models. For FID, KID, and KL Divergence, lower is better. For recognition accuracy, higher is
better. Bold font indicates the best value.
Figure 4. Qualitative Comparison results on sound spectrogram generated by different methods.
when class labels are available, it is obvious that there is
a large gap to reach the performance of the physics-driven
method. Fig. 4 illustrates a comparison of three examples
of generated spectrograms given a video by ConvNet-based,
Transformer-based, and our physics-driven approaches to the
ground truth. While the ConvNet and Transformer-based ap-
proaches could also capture some correspondences between
audio and video, it is obvious that a lot of noise appears
in the generated spectrogram because these approaches are
prone to learn an average smoothed representation, and thus
introducing many artifacts in the end. In comparison, our
physics-driven diffusion approach does not suffer from this
problem and can synthesize high fidelity sound from videos.
It is worth noting that the interoperability of our approach
could potentially unlock applications such as controllable
sound synthesis by manipulating the physics priors.
4.6. Human Perceptual Evaluation
In addition to the objective evaluation of our method,
we also perform human perceptual surveys using Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT). We aim to use perceptual surveys
to evaluate the effectiveness of our generated samples to
match the video content and the fidelity of the generated
samples. For all surveys, we do not request participants with
any background on the survey or our approach was given to
the participants to avoid perceptual biases. We surveyed 50
participants individually, where each participant was asked
to evaluate 10 videos along with different generated samples
from various methods. A total of 500 opinions were collected
in the end.
• Matching. In the first survey, we asked people to watch the
same video with different synthesized sounds and answer
the question: ”In which video the sound best matches the
video content?”. The participants would choose one sound-
track from the ConvNet-based, Transformer-based and
Physics-driven diffusion approaches. From results shown
in Table. 2 (Top) (left column), we observe that there exists
a clear indication that the sound generated with our method
is selected as the best match to the visual content with a
higher selected rate.
• Quality. In the second survey, we asked people (non-
expert) to choose the video with the highest sound quality,
including 3 variations of samples generated by ConvNet-

Model\Metric
Matching
Quality
Comparison to Baselines
ConvNet-based
18%
17.6%
Transformer-based
26.6%
28.8%
Ours
55.4%
53.6%
Perceptual Ablation Studies
Video-only
23.6%
23.6%
Video+label
37.8%
35.8%
Ours
38.6%
40.6%
Table 2. (Top) Human perceptual evaluation on matching and qual-
ity metrics. (Bottom) Ablation study on human perceptual evalua-
tion. The value indicates the percentage of Amazon Turkers who
select the method.
based, Transformer-based and Physics-driven diffusion ap-
proaches. Results in Table clearly indicate our approach
achieves the best sound quality.
• Perceptual Ablation Studies. In the last survey, we per-
formed a perceptual ablation study to test how the physics
priors could influence the perception of the generated im-
pact sounds compared to the approaches without it. Survey
results shown in Table 2 (Bottom) and suggest that in com-
parison to video only model, the physics priors improve the
overall perception of synthesized impact sounds.
4.7. Ablation Studies
We performed three ablation studies to answer the fol-
lowing questions. Q1: How do residual parameters influence
the physics priors? Q2: What is the contribution of each
component to our approach? Q3: Is our method better than
simple retrieval methods?
Q1. Since the physics and residual parameters are essential in
our approach. We have investigated different physics priors
variants to find the most informative physics priors and use
the multi-resolution STFT loss of the reconstructed sounds
for evaluation. The results in Fig. 5(a) clearly show that the
loss decreases significantly with residual parameters. We
also find that using 100 residual parameters achieves the best
performance, while fewer or more residual parameters may
damage the performance.
Q2. We perform extensive experiments to understand the
contribution of each component. For all studies, we use the
nearest physics parameters/priors retrieved by visual latent
to synthesize the sound. Results are shown in Fig. 5(b). We
first observe that without residual components and diffu-
sion models, using estimated physics parameters to perform
modal synthesis could not obtain faithful impact sounds. The
physics priors could re-synthesize impact sounds with much
better quality with learned residual parameters. We further
show that using physics priors as the condition input to the
diffusion model achieves even better performance. We have
also performed an experiment to predict physics latent from
video input and use it as the condition for the diffusion model
but the quality of generated samples is poor. This is due to
the weak correspondence between video inputs and physics
Figure 5. (a) Ablation study on the importance and selection for the
number of residual parameters by testing multi-resolution STFT
loss. (b) Ablation study on the contribution of each component of
our approach using FID score, the lower the better.
behind the impact sounds and indicates the importance of
using video inputs to query physics priors of the training set
at the inference stage.
Q3. We consider two retrieval baselines for comparison. The
first one is a simple baseline without physics priors and dif-
fusion model. We only use visual features extracted from the
ResNet-50 backbone to search the nearest neighbor (NN) in
the training set and use the audio as output. In the second
experiment, we try our best to reproduce the model in [40]
since no official implementation is available. The model pre-
dicts sound features (cochleagrams) from images via LSTM.
For fair evaluation, a collection-based metric like FID is
invalid because the retrieved audios are in the real data distri-
bution. Therefore, we use sample-based metrics, including
KL Divergence between predicted and ground truth audio
features and Mean Square Error on the spectrogram level.
The table 3 clearly shows that our approach outperforms the
retrieval baselines by a large margin.
Model\Metric
KL Div. ↓
Spec. MSE↓
NN via Visual Features
10.60
0.307
NN via Predicted Sound Features [40]
7.39
0.205
Ours
2.04
0.149
Table 3. Comparison with retrieval methods.
5. Conclusion
We present a physics-driven diffusion model for impact
sound synthesis from videos. Our model can effectively gen-
erate high fidelity sounds for physical object interactions.
We achieve such function by leveraging physics priors as
guidance for the diffusion model to generate impact sounds
from video input. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach outperforms other methods quantitatively and qual-
itatively. Ablation studies have demonstrated that physics
priors are critical for generating high-fidelity sounds from
video inputs. The limitation of our approach naturally be-
comes that our approach cannot generate impact sounds for
unseen physics parameters due to the query process (failure
case demonstration is shown in Supplementary material),
while we can generate novel sounds given an unseen video.

Acknowledgements.
This work was supported by the
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, DARPA MCS, DSO grant
DSOCO21072, and gift funding from MERL, Cisco, Sony,
and Amazon.
References
[1] Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark
Johnson, Niko S¨underhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen Gould, and
Anton Van Den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation:
Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real
environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3674–3683,
2018. 2
[2] Relja Arandjelovic and Andrew Zisserman. Look, listen and
learn. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 609–617, 2017. 3
[3] Yusuf Aytar, Carl Vondrick, and Antonio Torralba. Soundnet:
Learning sound representations from unlabeled video. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
3
[4] Kan Chen, Chuanxi Zhang, Chen Fang, Zhaowen Wang,
Trung Bui, and Ram Nevatia. Visually indicated sound genera-
tion by perceptually optimized classification. In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)
Workshops, pages 0–0, 2018. 2
[5] Lele Chen, Sudhanshu Srivastava, Zhiyao Duan, and Chen-
liang Xu. Deep cross-modal audio-visual generation. In
Proceedings of the on Thematic Workshops of ACM Multime-
dia 2017, pages 349–357, 2017. 2
[6] Nuo Chen, Chenyu You, and Yuexian Zou. Self-supervised di-
alogue learning for spoken conversational question answering.
In INTERSPEECH, 2021. 2
[7] Peihao Chen, Yang Zhang, Mingkui Tan, Hongdong Xiao,
Deng Huang, and Chuang Gan. Generating visually aligned
sound from videos. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
29:8292–8302, 2020. 1, 2
[8] Zhenfang Chen, Jiayuan Mao, Jiajun Wu, Kwan-Yee Kenneth
Wong, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan. Grounding
physical concepts of objects and events through dynamic
visual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16564, 2021. 2
[9] Samuel Clarke, Negin Heravi, Mark Rau, Ruohan Gao, Jiajun
Wu, Doug James, and Jeannette Bohg. Diffimpact: Differ-
entiable rendering and identification of impact sounds. In
Conference on Robot Learning, pages 662–673. PMLR, 2022.
2, 4
[10] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models
beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021. 3
[11] Chuang Gan, Deng Huang, Peihao Chen, Joshua B Tenen-
baum, and Antonio Torralba. Foley music: Learning to gener-
ate music from videos. In European Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 758–775. Springer, 2020. 2
[12] Chuang Gan, Deng Huang, Hang Zhao, Joshua B Tenenbaum,
and Antonio Torralba. Music gesture for visual sound separa-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 10478–10487,
2020. 3
[13] Chuang Gan, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Martin Schrimpf,
James Traer, Julian De Freitas, Jonas Kubilius, Abhishek
Bhandwaldar, Nick Haber, Megumi Sano, et al. Threedworld:
A platform for interactive multi-modal physical simulation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04954, 2020. 3
[14] Chuang Gan, Yiwei Zhang, Jiajun Wu, Boqing Gong, and
Joshua B Tenenbaum. Look, listen, and act: Towards audio-
visual embodied navigation. In 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 9701–
9707. IEEE, 2020. 3
[15] Chuang Gan, Hang Zhao, Peihao Chen, David Cox, and An-
tonio Torralba. Self-supervised moving vehicle tracking with
stereo sound. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 7053–7062, 2019. 3
[16] Ruohan Gao, Rogerio Feris, and Kristen Grauman. Learning
to separate object sounds by watching unlabeled video. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), pages 35–53, 2018. 3
[17] Ruohan Gao, Tae-Hyun Oh, Kristen Grauman, and Lorenzo
Torresani. Listen to look: Action recognition by previewing
audio. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 10457–10467,
2020. 3
[18] Daniel Griffin and Jae Lim. Signal estimation from modified
short-time fourier transform. IEEE Transactions on acoustics,
speech, and signal processing, 32(2):236–243, 1984. 6
[19] Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang,
Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and Baining Guo. Vector quan-
tized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 10696–10706, 2022. 3
[20] John Hershey and Javier Movellan. Audio vision: Using
audio-visual synchrony to locate sounds. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 12, 1999. 3
[21] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffu-
sion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 3, 5
[22] Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet,
Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans. Cascaded diffusion
models for high fidelity image generation. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 23:47–1, 2022. 3
[23] Rongjie Huang, Zhou Zhao, Huadai Liu, Jinglin Liu, Chenye
Cui, and Yi Ren. Prodiff: Progressive fast diffusion model for
high-quality text-to-speech. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, pages 2595–2605,
2022. 3
[24] Hamid Izadinia, Imran Saleemi, and Mubarak Shah. Mul-
timodal analysis for identification and segmentation of
moving-sounding objects. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia,
15(2):378–390, 2012. 3
[25] Myeonghun Jeong, Hyeongju Kim, Sung Jun Cheon, By-
oung Jin Choi, and Nam Soo Kim.
Diff-tts: A denois-
ing diffusion model for text-to-speech.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.01409, 2021. 3, 4, 5
[26] Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan
Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile diffusion model for audio
synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020. 3

[27] Junhyeok Lee and Seungu Han. Nu-wave: A diffusion prob-
abilistic model for neural audio upsampling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.02321, 2021. 3
[28] Naihan Li, Shujie Liu, Yanqing Liu, Sheng Zhao, and Ming
Liu. Neural speech synthesis with transformer network. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 33, pages 6706–6713, 2019. 6
[29] Yikuan Li, Shishir Rao, Jos´e Roberto Ayala Solares, Abdelaali
Hassaine, Rema Ramakrishnan, Dexter Canoy, Yajie Zhu,
Kazem Rahimi, and Gholamreza Salimi-Khorshidi. Behrt:
transformer for electronic health records. Scientific reports,
10(1):1–12, 2020. 2
[30] Ji Lin, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Tsm: Temporal shift
module for efficient video understanding. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
4, 6
[31] Fenglin Liu, Xian Wu, Chenyu You, Shen Ge, Yuexian Zou,
and Xu Sun. Aligning source visual and target language
domains for unpaired video captioning. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2021. 2
[32] Fenglin Liu, Chenyu You, Xian Wu, Shen Ge, Xu Sun, et al.
Auto-encoding knowledge graph for unsupervised medical
report generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 34, 2021. 2
[33] Xiang Long, Chuang Gan, Gerard De Melo, Jiajun Wu, Xiao
Liu, and Shilei Wen. Attention clusters: Purely attention
based local feature integration for video classification. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 7834–7843, 2018. 3
[34] Xiang Long, Chuang Gan, Gerard Melo, Xiao Liu, Yandong
Li, Fu Li, and Shilei Wen. Multimodal keyless attention
fusion for video classification. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018. 3
[35] Gautam Mittal, Jesse Engel, Curtis Hawthorne, and Ian Simon.
Symbolic music generation with diffusion models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.16091, 2021. 3
[36] Arsha Nagrani, Samuel Albanie, and Andrew Zisserman. See-
ing voices and hearing faces: Cross-modal biometric match-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 8427–8436, 2018. 3
[37] Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved
denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8162–8171. PMLR,
2021. 3
[38] James F O’Brien, Perry R Cook, and Georg Essl. Synthesizing
sounds from physically based motion. In Proceedings of the
28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, pages 529–536, 2001. 1
[39] James F O’Brien, Chen Shen, and Christine M Gatchalian.
Synthesizing sounds from rigid-body simulations. In Proceed-
ings of the 2002 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium
on Computer animation, pages 175–181, 2002. 1
[40] Andrew Owens, Phillip Isola, Josh McDermott, Antonio Tor-
ralba, Edward H Adelson, and William T Freeman. Visually
indicated sounds. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 2405–2413,
2016. 2, 6, 8
[41] Andrew Owens, Jiajun Wu, Josh H McDermott, William T
Freeman, and Antonio Torralba. Ambient sound provides
supervision for visual learning. In European conference on
computer vision, pages 801–816. Springer, 2016. 2
[42] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervi-
sion. In International conference on machine learning, pages
8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 2
[43] Zhimin Ren, Hengchin Yeh, and Ming C Lin.
Example-
guided physically based modal sound synthesis. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 32(1):1–16, 2013. 2, 3
[44] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net:
Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
In International Conference on Medical image computing
and computer-assisted intervention, pages 234–241. Springer,
2015. 12
[45] Andrew Rouditchenko, Hang Zhao, Chuang Gan, Josh Mc-
Dermott, and Antonio Torralba. Self-supervised audio-visual
co-segmentation. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 2357–2361. IEEE, 2019. 3
[46] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay
Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour,
Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes,
et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep
language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11487,
2022. 2
[47] Arda Senocak, Tae-Hyun Oh, Junsik Kim, Ming-Hsuan Yang,
and In So Kweon. Learning to localize sound source in visual
scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4358–4366, 2018. 3
[48] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan,
and Surya Ganguli.
Deep unsupervised learning using
nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
3
[49] Kun Su, Xiulong Liu, and Eli Shlizerman. Audeo: Audio
generation for a silent performance video. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 33:3325–3337, 2020. 2
[50] Kun Su, Xiulong Liu, and Eli Shlizerman.
How does it
sound? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:29258–29273, 2021. 2
[51] Yapeng Tian, Jing Shi, Bochen Li, Zhiyao Duan, and Chen-
liang Xu. Audio-visual event localization in unconstrained
videos. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV), pages 247–263, 2018. 3
[52] James Traer, Maddie Cusimano, and Josh H McDermott. A
perceptually inspired generative model of rigid-body contact
sounds. In The 22nd International Conference on Digital
Audio Effects (DAFx-19), 2019. 2
[53] Kees Van Den Doel, Paul G Kry, and Dinesh K Pai. Fo-
leyautomatic: physically-based sound effects for interactive
simulation and animation. In Proceedings of the 28th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques,
pages 537–544, 2001. 1, 2

[54] Bryan Wang and Yi-Hsuan Yang. Performancenet: Score-to-
audio music generation with multi-band convolutional resid-
ual network. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 1174–1181, 2019. 6
[55] Xudong Xu, Bo Dai, and Dahua Lin.
Recursive visual
sound separation using minus-plus net. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 882–891, 2019. 3
[56] Ryuichi Yamamoto, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim. Par-
allel wavegan: A fast waveform generation model based on
generative adversarial networks with multi-resolution spectro-
gram. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages
6199–6203. IEEE, 2020. 4
[57] Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Push-
meet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Neural-symbolic vqa: Dis-
entangling reasoning from vision and language understanding.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
2
[58] Chenyu You, Nuo Chen, and Yuexian Zou. MRD-Net: Multi-
Modal Residual Knowledge Distillation for Spoken Question
Answering. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI, pages 3985–
3991, 2021. 2
[59] Chenyu You, Weicheng Dai, Fenglin Liu, Haoran Su, Xiaoran
Zhang, Lawrence Staib, and James S Duncan. Mine your
own anatomy: Revisiting medical image segmentation with
extremely limited labels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.13476,
2022. 2
[60] Chenyu You, Weicheng Dai, Yifei Min, Fenglin Liu, Xi-
aoran Zhang, Chen Feng, David A Clifton, S Kevin Zhou,
Lawrence Hamilton Staib, and James S Duncan. Rethinking
semi-supervised medical image segmentation: A variance-
reduction perspective.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01735,
2023. 2
[61] Chenyu You, Ruihan Zhao, Fenglin Liu, Siyuan Dong,
Sandeep P Chinchali, Lawrence Hamilton Staib, James s
Duncan, et al. Class-aware adversarial transformers for medi-
cal image segmentation. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2
[62] Jiahui Yu, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Legg Yeung, Mo-
jtaba Seyedhosseini, and Yonghui Wu. Coca: Contrastive
captioners are image-text foundation models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.01917, 2022. 2
[63] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146, 2016. 12
[64] Hang Zhao, Chuang Gan, Andrew Rouditchenko, Carl Von-
drick, Josh McDermott, and Antonio Torralba. The sound
of pixels. In Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision (ECCV), pages 570–586, 2018. 3
[65] Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Xudong Xu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang
Wang. Vision-infused deep audio inpainting. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 283–292, 2019. 3
[66] Yipin Zhou, Zhaowen Wang, Chen Fang, Trung Bui, and
Tamara L Berg. Visual to sound: Generating natural sound for
videos in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3550–3558,
2018. 1, 2
[67] Hao Zhu, Man-Di Luo, Rui Wang, Ai-Hua Zheng, and Ran
He. Deep audio-visual learning: A survey. International
Journal of Automation and Computing, 18(3):351–376, 2021.
1

A. Generated Samples
Please see the attached video for a short overview
and generated impact sound samples using our physics-
driven diffusion models. Please turn Audio ON and use
headphones for best perception of the audio.
B. Fixed Physics Priors
As we mentioned in the main paper, while we use the
physics latent from training set, we can still generate novel
sound since the diffusion model also takes additional visual
features as input. To show that, we fix one type physics priors
and use various video inputs to synthesize impact sounds.
We found that the synthesized sounds are strongly impacted
by the physics priors but different visual inputs can still intro-
duce the diversity of the sounds. Please check out the videos
with prefix fix physics priors type sample num.mp4.
C. Physics Priors Editing
Since the physics priors are transparent, we can manip-
ulate them to control the synthesized sounds. In the first
experiment, we decrease values of power and decay rate
in the lowest 200 modes to reduce low frequency compo-
nents and we also set the residual parameters be zero for
better visualization. The generated spectrogram results are
shown in Fig. 6. In addition, we also try highlighting the low
frequency components by tuning up the power and decay
values of the lowest 200 modes. The generated spectrogram
results are shown in Fig. 7. Both results demonstrate that the
transparency of the physics priors.
Figure 6. Spectrogram examples of removing low frequency parts
by manipulating physics priors.
D. Additional Implementation Details
D.1. Physics Priors Representation & Encoder
We provide more details of how physics parameters and
residual parameters are scaled and fitted into the diffusion
model. For each estimated frequency feature f, we compute
the distance to the corresponding central frequency of the
spectrogram bin and then normalize the distance by the bin
resolution (21Hz in our case) to obtain a value between
Figure 7. Spectrogram examples of adding low frequency parts by
manipulating physics priors.
−1 and 1. The power feature p is extracted in dB scale.
We normalize it by 2p/(−80) −1 where −80dB indicates
the silence. The decay feature λ is also applied min-max
normalization to map the value to the range of −1 and 1.
For residual parameters, we use a transformer spectrogram
encoder to learn w and γ by applying a sigmoid function to
outputs of two linear projection layers. We then use a physics
priors encoder to take produce the physics latent. The details
of the physics priors encoder are shown in Fig. 8.
D.2. Diffusion Model Details
The architecture is a U-Net [44] based on a Wide
ResNet [63]. Our models use four feature map resolutions
and each resolution level contains two convolutional residual
blocks and a spatial attention module. The channel dimen-
sions increase from 1 to 64, 128, 256, and 512. We use
sinusoidal position embedding for diffusion time t which is
added into each residual block. We use cosine schedule for
diffusion noise and set the sampling timesteps be T = 1000.
Figure 8. Physics Priors Encoder Details
E. Failure case demonstration
We show an example of having an impact on rock. In the
following figure, the (a, b) are common rock sounds in the
training set. However, we find a rare case in the testing set
shown in (c). While our approach can generate new realistic
rock sound (d), it is different from the ground truth.
