DreamBooth: Fine Tuning Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
for Subject-Driven Generation
Nataniel Ruiz∗,1,2
Yuanzhen Li1
Varun Jampani1
Yael Pritch1
Michael Rubinstein1
Kﬁr Aberman1
1 Google Research
2 Boston University
Figure 1. With just a few images (typically 3-5) of a subject (left), DreamBooth—our AI-powered photo booth—can generate a myriad
of images of the subject in different contexts (right), using the guidance of a text prompt. The results exhibit natural interactions with the
environment, as well as novel articulations and variation in lighting conditions, all while maintaining high ﬁdelity to the key visual features
of the subject.
Abstract
Large text-to-image models achieved a remarkable leap
in the evolution of AI, enabling high-quality and diverse
synthesis of images from a given text prompt.
However,
these models lack the ability to mimic the appearance of
subjects in a given reference set and synthesize novel rendi-
tions of them in different contexts. In this work, we present
a new approach for “personalization” of text-to-image dif-
fusion models. Given as input just a few images of a sub-
ject, we ﬁne-tune a pretrained text-to-image model such that
it learns to bind a unique identiﬁer with that speciﬁc sub-
ject. Once the subject is embedded in the output domain of
the model, the unique identiﬁer can be used to synthesize
novel photorealistic images of the subject contextualized in
different scenes. By leveraging the semantic prior embed-
ded in the model with a new autogenous class-speciﬁc prior
preservation loss, our technique enables synthesizing the
subject in diverse scenes, poses, views and lighting condi-
tions that do not appear in the reference images. We ap-
ply our technique to several previously-unassailable tasks,
including subject recontextualization, text-guided view syn-
thesis, and artistic rendering, all while preserving the sub-
ject’s key features. We also provide a new dataset and eval-
uation protocol for this new task of subject-driven genera-
tion. Project page: https://dreambooth.github.io/
*This research was performed while Nataniel Ruiz was at Google.
1. Introduction
Can you imagine your own dog traveling around the
world, or your favorite bag displayed in the most exclusive
showroom in Paris? What about your parrot being the main
character of an illustrated storybook? Rendering such imag-
inary scenes is a challenging task that requires synthesizing
instances of speciﬁc subjects (e.g., objects, animals) in new
contexts such that they naturally and seamlessly blend into
the scene.
Recently developed large text-to-image models have
shown unprecedented capabilities, by enabling high-quality
and diverse synthesis of images based on a text prompt writ-
ten in natural language [54,61]. One of the main advantages
of such models is the strong semantic prior learned from a
large collection of image-caption pairs. Such a prior learns,
for instance, to bind the word “dog” with various instances
of dogs that can appear in different poses and contexts in
an image. While the synthesis capabilities of these models
are unprecedented, they lack the ability to mimic the ap-
pearance of subjects in a given reference set, and synthesize
novel renditions of the same subjects in different contexts.
The main reason is that the expressiveness of their output
domain is limited; even the most detailed textual description
of an object may yield instances with different appearances.
arXiv:2208.12242v2  [cs.CV]  15 Mar 2023

Furthermore, even models whose text embedding lies in a
shared language-vision space [52] cannot accurately recon-
struct the appearance of given subjects but only create vari-
ations of the image content (Figure 2).
In this work, we present a new approach for “personal-
ization” of text-to-image diffusion models (adapting them
to user-speciﬁc image generation needs). Our goal is to ex-
pand the language-vision dictionary of the model such that
it binds new words with speciﬁc subjects the user wants
to generate. Once the new dictionary is embedded in the
model, it can use these words to synthesize novel photo-
realistic images of the subject, contextualized in different
scenes, while preserving their key identifying features. The
effect is akin to a “magic photo booth”—once a few im-
ages of the subject are taken, the booth generates photos of
the subject in different conditions and scenes, as guided by
simple and intuitive text prompts (Figure 1).
More formally, given a few images of a subject (∼3-
5), our objective is to implant the subject into the out-
put domain of the model such that it can be synthesized
with a unique identiﬁer. To that end, we propose a tech-
nique to represent a given subject with rare token identiﬁers
and ﬁne-tune a pre-trained, diffusion-based text-to-image
framework.
We ﬁne-tune the text-to-image model with the input im-
ages and text prompts containing a unique identiﬁer fol-
lowed by the class name of the subject (e.g., “A [V] dog”).
The latter enables the model to use its prior knowledge on
the subject class while the class-speciﬁc instance is bound
with the unique identiﬁer.
In order to prevent language
drift [34, 40] that causes the model to associate the class
name (e.g., “dog”) with the speciﬁc instance, we propose
an autogenous, class-speciﬁc prior preservation loss, which
leverages the semantic prior on the class that is embedded in
the model, and encourages it to generate diverse instances
of the same class as our subject.
We apply our approach to a myriad of text-based im-
age generation applications including recontextualization of
subjects, modiﬁcation of their properties, original art rendi-
tions, and more, paving the way to a new stream of pre-
viously unassailable tasks. We highlight the contribution
of each component in our method via ablation studies, and
compare with alternative baselines and related work. We
also conduct a user study to evaluate subject and prompt
ﬁdelity in our synthesized images, compared to alternative
approaches.
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst technique
that tackles this new challenging problem of subject-driven
generation, allowing users, from just a few casually cap-
tured images of a subject, synthesize novel renditions of the
subject in different contexts while maintaining its distinc-
tive features.
To evaluate this new task, we also construct a new dataset
Figure 2. Subject-driven generation. Given a particular clock
(left), it is hard to generate it while maintaining high ﬁdelity to
its key visual features (second and third columns showing DALL-
E2 [54] image-guided generation and Imagen [61] text-guided
generation; text prompt used for Imagen: “retro style yellow alarm
clock with a white clock face and a yellow number three on the
right part of the clock face in the jungle”). Our approach (right)
can synthesize the clock with high ﬁdelity and in new contexts
(text prompt: “a [V] clock in the jungle”).
that contains various subjects captured in different contexts,
and propose a new evaluation protocol that measures the
subject ﬁdelity and prompt ﬁdelity of the generated results.
We make our dataset and evaluation protocol publicly avail-
able on the project webpage.
2. Related work
Image Composition.
Image composition techniques
[13, 38, 70] aim to clone a given subject into a new back-
ground such that the subject melds into the scene.
To
consider composition in novel poses, one may apply 3D
reconstruction techniques [6, 8, 41, 49, 68] which usually
works on rigid objects and require a larger number of views.
Some drawbacks include scene integration (lighting, shad-
ows, contact) and the inability to generate novel scenes.
In contrast, our approach enable generation of subjects in
novel poses and new contexts.
Text-to-Image Editing and Synthesis. Text-driven im-
age manipulation has recently achieved signiﬁcant progress
using GANs [9,22,28–30] combined with image-text rep-
resentations such as CLIP [52], yielding realistic manip-
ulations using text [2, 7, 21, 43, 48, 71].
These methods

work well on structured scenarios (e.g. human face edit-
ing) and can struggle over diverse datasets where sub-
jects are varied. Crowson et al. [14] use VQ-GAN [18]
and train over more diverse data to alleviate this concern.
Other works [4, 31] exploit the recent diffusion models
[25, 25, 45, 58, 60, 62–66], which achieve state-of-the-art
generation quality over highly diverse datasets, often sur-
passing GANs [15]. While most works that require only
text are limited to global editing [14, 33], Bar-Tal et al. [5]
proposed a text-based localized editing technique without
using masks, showing impressive results. While most of
these editing approaches allow modiﬁcation of global prop-
erties or local editing of a given image, none enables gener-
ating novel renditions of a given subject in new contexts.
There also exists work on text-to-image synthesis [14,
16, 19, 24, 27, 35, 36, 50, 51, 55, 58, 67, 74]. Recent large
text-to-image models such as Imagen [61], DALL-E2 [54],
Parti [72], CogView2 [17] and Stable Diffusion [58] demon-
strated unprecedented semantic generation. These models
do not provide ﬁne-grained control over a generated image
and use text guidance only. Speciﬁcally, it is challenging or
impossible to preserve the identity of a subject consistently
across synthesized images.
Controllable Generative Models.
There are various
approaches to control generative models, where some of
them might prove to be viable directions for subject-driven
prompt-guided image synthesis.
Liu et al. [39] propose
a diffusion-based technique allowing for image variations
guided by reference image or text. To overcome subject
modiﬁcation, several works [3, 44] assume a user-provided
mask to restrict the modiﬁed area. Inversion [12, 15, 54]
can be used to preserve a subject while modifying context.
Prompt-to-prompt [23] allows for local and global editing
without an input mask. These methods fall short of identity-
preserving novel sample generation of a subject.
In the context of GANs, Pivotal Tuning [57] allows for
real image editing by ﬁnetuning the model with an inverted
latent code anchor, and Nitzan et al. [46] extended this work
to GAN ﬁnetuning on faces to train a personalized prior,
which requires around 100 images and are limited to the
face domain. Casanova et al. [11] propose an instance con-
ditioned GAN that can generate variations of an instance,
although it can struggle with unique subjects and does not
preserve all subject details.
Finally, the concurrent work of Gal et al. [20] proposes
a method to represent visual concepts, like an object or
a style, through new tokens in the embedding space of a
frozen text-to-image model, resulting in small personalized
token embeddings. While this method is limited by the ex-
pressiveness of the frozen diffusion model, our ﬁne-tuning
approach enables us to embed the subject within the model’s
output domain, resulting in the generation of novel images
of the subject which preserve its key visual features.
3. Method
Given only a few (typically 3-5) casually captured im-
ages of a speciﬁc subject, without any textual description,
our objective is to generate new images of the subject
with high detail ﬁdelity and with variations guided by text
prompts. Example variations include changing the subject
location, changing subject properties such as color or shape,
modifying the subject’s pose, viewpoint, and other semantic
modiﬁcations. We do not impose any restrictions on input
image capture settings and the subject image can have vary-
ing contexts. We next provide some background on text-
to-image diffusion models (Sec. 3.1), then present our ﬁne-
tuning technique to bind a unique identiﬁer with a subject
described in a few images (Sec. 3.2), and ﬁnally propose a
class-speciﬁc prior-preservation loss that enables us to over-
come language drift in our ﬁne-tuned model (Sec. 3.3).
3.1. Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Diffusion models are probabilistic generative models
that are trained to learn a data distribution by the gradual
denoising of a variable sampled from a Gaussian distribu-
tion. Speciﬁcally, we are interested in a pre-trained text-to-
image diffusion model ˆxθ that, given an initial noise map
ϵ ∼N(0, I) and a conditioning vector c = Γ(P) generated
using a text encoder Γ and a text prompt P, generates an
image xgen = ˆxθ(ϵ, c). They are trained using a squared
error loss to denoise a variably-noised image or latent code
zt := αtx + σtϵ as follows:
Ex,c,ϵ,t

wt∥ˆxθ(αtx + σtϵ, c) −x∥2
2

(1)
where x is the ground-truth image, c is a conditioning
vector (e.g., obtained from a text prompt), and αt, σt, wt
are terms that control the noise schedule and sample qual-
ity, and are functions of the diffusion process time t ∼
U([0, 1]). A more detailed description is given in the sup-
plementary material.
3.2. Personalization of Text-to-Image Models
Our ﬁrst task is to implant the subject instance into the
output domain of the model such that we can query the
model for varied novel images of the subject. One natu-
ral idea is to ﬁne-tune the model using the few-shot dataset
of the subject.
Careful care had to be taken when ﬁne-
tuning generative models such as GANs in a few-shot sce-
nario as it can cause overﬁtting and mode-collapse - as
well as not capturing the target distribution sufﬁciently well.
There has been research on techniques to avoid these pit-
falls [37, 42, 47, 56, 69], although, in contrast to our work,
this line of work primarily seeks to generate images that re-
semble the target distribution but has no requirement of sub-
ject preservation. With regards to these pitfalls, we observe
the peculiar ﬁnding that, given a careful ﬁne-tuning setup

Figure 3. Fine-tuning. Given ∼3−5 images of a subject we ﬁne-
tune a text-to-image diffusion model with the input images paired
with a text prompt containing a unique identiﬁer and the name of
the class the subject belongs to (e.g., “A [V] dog”), in parallel, we
apply a class-speciﬁc prior preservation loss, which leverages the
semantic prior that the model has on the class and encourages it to
generate diverse instances belong to the subject’s class using the
class name in a text prompt (e.g., “A dog”).
using the diffusion loss from Eq 1, large text-to-image dif-
fusion models seem to excel at integrating new information
into their domain without forgetting the prior or overﬁtting
to a small set of training images.
Designing Prompts for Few-Shot Personalization
Our
goal is to “implant” a new (unique identiﬁer, subject) pair
into the diffusion model’s “dictionary” . In order to by-
pass the overhead of writing detailed image descriptions for
a given image set we opt for a simpler approach and label
all input images of the subject “a [identiﬁer] [class noun]”,
where [identiﬁer] is a unique identiﬁer linked to the sub-
ject and [class noun] is a coarse class descriptor of the sub-
ject (e.g. cat, dog, watch, etc.). The class descriptor can
be provided by the user or obtained using a classiﬁer. We
use a class descriptor in the sentence in order to tether the
prior of the class to our unique subject and ﬁnd that using
a wrong class descriptor, or no class descriptor increases
training time and language drift while decreasing perfor-
mance. In essence, we seek to leverage the model’s prior
of the speciﬁc class and entangle it with the embedding of
our subject’s unique identiﬁer so we can leverage the visual
prior to generate new poses and articulations of the subject
in different contexts.
Rare-token Identiﬁers
We generally ﬁnd existing En-
glish words (e.g. “unique”, “special”) suboptimal since the
model has to learn to disentangle them from their original
meaning and to re-entangle them to reference our subject.
This motivates the need for an identiﬁer that has a weak
prior in both the language model and the diffusion model. A
hazardous way of doing this is to select random characters
in the English language and concatenate them to generate a
rare identiﬁer (e.g. “xxy5syt00”). In reality, the tokenizer
might tokenize each letter separately, and the prior for the
diffusion model is strong for these letters. We often ﬁnd that
these tokens incur the similar weaknesses as using common
English words. Our approach is to ﬁnd rare tokens in the
vocabulary, and then invert these tokens into text space, in
order to minimize the probability of the identiﬁer having a
strong prior. We perform a rare-token lookup in the vocab-
ulary and obtain a sequence of rare token identiﬁers f( ˆV),
where f is a tokenizer; a function that maps character se-
quences to tokens and ˆV is the decoded text stemming from
the tokens f( ˆV). The sequence can be of variable length k,
and ﬁnd that relatively short sequences of k = {1, ..., 3}
work well. Then, by inverting the vocabulary using the de-
tokenizer on f( ˆV) we obtain a sequence of characters that
deﬁne our unique identiﬁer ˆV. For Imagen, we ﬁnd that us-
ing uniform random sampling of tokens that correspond to
3 or fewer Unicode characters (without spaces) and using
tokens in the T5-XXL tokenizer range of {5000, ..., 10000}
works well.
3.3. Class-speciﬁc Prior Preservation Loss
In our experience, the best results for maximum subject
ﬁdelity are achieved by ﬁne-tuning all layers of the model.
This includes ﬁne-tuning layers that are conditioned on the
text embeddings, which gives rise to the problem of lan-
guage drift.
Language drift has been an observed prob-
lem in language models [34, 40], where a model that is
pre-trained on a large text corpus and later ﬁne-tuned for
a speciﬁc task progressively loses syntactic and semantic
knowledge of the language. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the ﬁrst to ﬁnd a similar phenomenon affecting diffu-
sion models, where to model slowly forgets how to generate
subjects of the same class as the target subject.
Another problem is the possibility of reduced output di-
versity.
Text-to-image diffusion models naturally posses
high amounts of output diversity. When ﬁne-tuning on a
small set of images we would like to be able to generate the
subject in novel viewpoints, poses and articulations. Yet,
there is a risk of reducing the amount of variability in the
output poses and views of the subject (e.g. snapping to the
few-shot views). We observe that this is often the case, es-
pecially when the model is trained for too long.
To mitigate the two aforementioned issues, we propose
an autogenous class-speciﬁc prior preservation loss that en-
courages diversity and counters language drift. In essence,
our method is to supervise the model with its own gener-
ated samples, in order for it to retain the prior once the

few-shot ﬁne-tuning begins. This allows it to generate di-
verse images of the class prior, as well as retain knowl-
edge about the class prior that it can use in conjunction
with knowledge about the subject instance. Speciﬁcally,
we generate data xpr = ˆx(zt1, cpr) by using the ancestral
sampler on the frozen pre-trained diffusion model with ran-
dom initial noise zt1 ∼N(0, I) and conditioning vector
cpr := Γ(f(”a [class noun]”)). The loss becomes:
Ex,c,ϵ,ϵ′,t[wt∥ˆxθ(αtx + σtϵ, c) −x∥2
2+
λwt′∥ˆxθ(αt′xpr + σt′ϵ′, cpr) −xpr∥2
2],
(2)
where the second term is the prior-preservation term that
supervises the model with its own generated images, and λ
controls for the relative weight of this term. Figure 3 illus-
trates the model ﬁne-tuning with the class-generated sam-
ples and prior-preservation loss. Despite being simple, we
ﬁnd this prior-preservation loss is effective in encouraging
output diversity and in overcoming language-drift. We also
ﬁnd that we can train the model for more iterations with-
out risking overﬁtting. We ﬁnd that ∼1000 iterations with
λ = 1 and learning rate 10−5 for Imagen [61] and 5 × 10−6
for Stable Diffusion [59], and with a subject dataset size
of 3-5 images is enough to achieve good results. During
this process, ∼1000 “a [class noun]” samples are gener-
ated - but less can be used. The training process takes about
5 minutes on one TPUv4 for Imagen, and 5 minutes on a
NVIDIA A100 for Stable Diffusion.
4. Experiments
In this section, we show experiments and applications.
Our method enables a large expanse of text-guided semantic
modiﬁcations of our subject instances, including recontex-
tualization, modiﬁcation of subject properties such as mate-
rial and species, art rendition, and viewpoint modiﬁcation.
Importantly, across all of these modiﬁcations, we are able
to preserve the unique visual features that give the sub-
ject its identity and essence. If the task is recontextual-
ization, then the subject features are unmodiﬁed, but ap-
pearance (e.g., pose) may change. If the task is a stronger
semantic modiﬁcation, such as crossing between our sub-
ject and another species/object, then the key features of the
subject are preserved after modiﬁcation. In this section, we
reference the subject’s unique identiﬁer using [V]. We in-
clude speciﬁc Imagen and Stable Diffusion implementation
details in the supp. material.
4.1. Dataset and Evaluation
Dataset
We collected a dataset of 30 subjects, including
unique objects and pets such as backpacks, stuffed animals,
dogs, cats, sunglasses, cartoons, etc. We separate each sub-
ject into two categories: objects and live subjects/pets. 21
of the 30 subjects are objects, and 9 are live subjects/pets.
Figure 4. Comparisons with Textual Inversion [20] Given 4
input images (top row), we compare: DreamBooth Imagen (2nd
row), DreamBooth Stable Diffusion (3rd row), Textual Inversion
(bottom row).
Output images were created with the following
prompts (left to right): “a [V] vase in the snow”, “a [V] vase on
the beach”, “a [V] vase in the jungle”, “a [V] vase with the Eiffel
Tower in the background”. DreamBooth is stronger in both subject
and prompt ﬁdelity.
Method
DINO ↑
CLIP-I ↑
CLIP-T ↑
Real Images
0.774
0.885
N/A
DreamBooth (Imagen)
0.696
0.812
0.306
DreamBooth (Stable Diffusion)
0.668
0.803
0.305
Textual Inversion (Stable Diffusion)
0.569
0.780
0.255
Table 1.
Subject ﬁdelity (DINO, CLIP-I) and prompt ﬁdelity
(CLIP-T, CLIP-T-L) quantitative metric comparison.
Method
Subject Fidelity ↑
Prompt Fidelity ↑
DreamBooth (Stable Diffusion)
68%
81%
Textual Inversion (Stable Diffusion)
22%
12%
Undecided
10%
7%
Table 2. Subject ﬁdelity and prompt ﬁdelity user preference.
We provide one sample image for each of the subjects in
Figure 5.
Images for this dataset were collected by the
authors or sourced from Unsplash [1]. We also collected
25 prompts: 20 recontextualization prompts and 5 property
modiﬁcation prompts for objects; 10 recontextualization, 10

Figure 5. Dataset. Example images for each subject in our proposed dataset.
accessorization, and 5 property modiﬁcation prompts for
live subjects/pets. The full list of prompts can be found in
the supplementary material.
For the evaluation suite we generate four images per sub-
ject and per prompt, totaling 3,000 images. This allows us
to robustly measure performances and generalization capa-
bilities of a method. We make our dataset and evaluation
protocol publicly available on the project webpage for fu-
ture use in evaluating subject-driven generation.
Evaluation Metrics
One important aspect to evaluate is
subject ﬁdelity: the preservation of subject details in gener-
ated images. For this, we compute two metrics: CLIP-I and
DINO [10]. CLIP-I is the average pairwise cosine similarity
between CLIP [52] embeddings of generated and real im-
ages. Although this metric has been used in other work [20],
it is not constructed to distinguish between different sub-
jects that could have highly similar text descriptions (e.g.
two different yellow clocks). Our proposed DINO metric
is the average pairwise cosine similarity between the ViT-
S/16 DINO embeddings of generated and real images. This
is our preferred metric, since, by construction and in con-
trast to supervised networks, DINO is not trained to ignore
differences between subjects of the same class. Instead, the
self-supervised training objective encourages distinction of
unique features of a subject or image. The second impor-
tant aspect to evaluate is prompt ﬁdelity, measured as the
average cosine similarity between prompt and image CLIP
embeddings. We denote this as CLIP-T.

Figure 6. Encouraging diversity with prior-preservation loss.
Naive ﬁne-tuning can result in overﬁtting to input image context
and subject appearance (e.g. pose). PPL acts as a regularizer that
alleviates overﬁtting and encourages diversity, allowing for more
pose variability and appearance diversity.
4.2. Comparisons
We compare our results with Textual Inversion, the re-
cent concurrent work of Gal et al. [20], using the hyperpa-
rameters provided in their work. We ﬁnd that this work is
the only comparable work in the literature that is subject-
driven, text-guided and generates novel images. We gen-
erate images for DreamBooth using Imagen, DreamBooth
using Stable Diffusion and Textual Inversion using Stable
Diffusion. We compute DINO and CLIP-I subject ﬁdelity
metrics and the CLIP-T prompt ﬁdelity metric. In Table 1
we show sizeable gaps in both subject and prompt ﬁdelity
metrics for DreamBooth over Textual Inversion. We ﬁnd
that DreamBooth (Imagen) achieves higher scores for both
subject and prompt ﬁdelity than DreamBooth (Stable Dif-
fusion), approaching the upper-bound of subject ﬁdelity for
real images. We believe that this is due to the larger expres-
sive power and higher output quality of Imagen.
Further, we compare Textual Inversion (Stable Diffu-
sion) and DreamBooth (Stable Diffusion) by conducting a
user study. For subject ﬁdelity, we asked 72 users to an-
swer questionnaires of 25 comparative questions (3 users
per questionnaire), totaling 1800 answers. Samples are ran-
domly selected from a large pool. Each question shows the
set of real images for a subject, and one generated image of
that subject by each method (with a random prompt). Users
are asked to answer the question: “Which of the two images
best reproduces the identity (e.g. item type and details) of
the reference item?”, and we include a “Cannot Determine
/ Both Equally” option. Similarly for prompt ﬁdelity, we
Method
PRES ↓
DIV ↑
DINO ↑
CLIP-I ↑
CLIP-T ↑
DreamBooth (Imagen) w/ PPL
0.493
0.391
0.684
0.815
0.308
DreamBooth (Imagen)
0.664
0.371
0.712
0.828
0.306
Table 3. Prior preservation loss (PPL) ablation displaying a prior
preservation (PRES) metric, diversity metric (DIV) and subject
and prompt ﬁdelity metrics.
Method
DINO ↑
CLIP-I ↑
Correct Class
0.744
0.853
No Class
0.303
0.607
Wrong Class
0.454
0.728
Table 4. Class name ablation with subject ﬁdelity metrics.
ask “Which of the two images is best described by the ref-
erence text?”. We average results using majority voting and
present them in Table 2. We ﬁnd an overwhelming prefer-
ence for DreamBooth for both subject ﬁdelity and prompt
ﬁdelity. This shines a light on results in Table 1, where
DINO differences of around 0.1 and CLIP-T differences of
0.05 are signiﬁcant in terms of user preference. Finally, we
show qualitative comparisons in Figure 4. We observe that
DreamBooth better preserves subject identity, and is more
faithful to prompts. We show samples of the user study in
the supp. material.
4.3. Ablation Studies
Prior Preservation Loss Ablation
We ﬁne-tune Imagen
on 15 subjects from our dataset, with and without our pro-
posed prior preservation loss (PPL). The prior preservation
loss seeks to combat language drift and preserve the prior.
We compute a prior preservation metric (PRES) by comput-
ing the average pairwise DINO embeddings between gener-
ated images of random subjects of the prior class and real
images of our speciﬁc subject. The higher this metric, the
more similar random subjects of the class are to our speciﬁc
subject, indicating collapse of the prior. We report results in
Table 3 and observe that PPL substantially counteracts lan-
guage drift and helps retain the ability to generate diverse
images of the prior class. Additionally, we compute a di-
versity metric (DIV) using the average LPIPS [73] cosine
similarity between generated images of same subject with
same prompt. We observe that our model trained with PPL
achieves higher diversity (with slightly diminished subject
ﬁdelity), which can also be observed qualitatively in Fig-
ure 6, where our model trained with PPL overﬁts less to the
environment of the reference images and can generate the
dog in more diverse poses and articulations.
Class-Prior Ablation
We ﬁnetune Imagen on a subset of
our dataset subjects (5 subjects) with no class noun, a ran-
domly sampled incorrect class noun, and the correct class
noun. With the correct class noun for our subject, we are
able to faithfully ﬁt to the subject, take advantage of the

Figure 7. Recontextualization. We generate images of the subjects in different environments, with high preservation of subject details and
realistic scene-subject interactions. We show the prompts below each image.
class prior, allowing us to generate our subject in various
contexts. When an incorrect class noun (e.g. “can” for a
backpack) is used, we run into contention between our sub-
ject and and the class prior - sometimes obtaining cylindri-
cal backpacks, or otherwise misshapen subjects. If we train
with no class noun, the model does not leverage the class
prior, has difﬁculty learning the subject and converging, and
can generate erroneous samples. Subject ﬁdelity results are
shown in Table 4, with substantially higher subject ﬁdelity
for our proposed approach.
4.4. Applications
Recontextualization
We can generate novel images for a
speciﬁc subject in different contexts (Figure 7) with descrip-
tive prompts (“a [V] [class noun] [context description]”).
Importantly, we are able to generate the subject in new
poses and articulations, with previously unseen scene struc-
ture and realistic integration of the subject in the scene (e.g.
contact, shadows, reﬂections).
Art Renditions
Given a prompt “a painting of a [V] [class
noun] in the style of [famous painter]” or “a statue of a [V]
[class noun] in the style of [famous sculptor]” we are able
to generate artistic renditions of our subject. Unlike style
transfer, where the source structure is preserved and only
the style is transferred, we are able to generate meaning-
ful, novel variations depending on the artistic style, while
preserving subject identity.
E.g, as shown in Figure 8,
“Michelangelo”, we generated a pose that is novel and not
seen in the input images.
Figure 8. Novel view synthesis, art renditions, and property
modiﬁcations.
We are able to generate novel and meaningful
images while faithfully preserving subject identity and essence.
More applications and examples in the supplementary material.
Novel View Synthesis
We are able to render the subject
under novel viewpoints. In Figure 8, we generate new im-

Figure 9.
Failure modes.
Given a rare prompted context the
model might fail at generating the correct environment (a). It is
possible for context and subject appearance to become entangled
(b). Finally, it is possible for the model to overﬁt and generate
images similar to the training set, especially if prompts reﬂect the
original environment of the training set (c).
ages of the input cat (with consistent complex fur patterns)
under new viewpoints. We highlight that the model has not
seen this speciﬁc cat from behind, below, or above - yet it is
able to extrapolate knowledge from the class prior to gen-
erate these novel views given only 4 frontal images of the
subject.
Property Modiﬁcation
We are able to modify subject
properties. For example, we show crosses between a spe-
ciﬁc Chow Chow dog and different animal species in the
bottom row of Figure 8. We prompt the model with sen-
tences of the following structure: “a cross of a [V] dog and
a [target species]”. In particular, we can see in this exam-
ple that the identity of the dog is well preserved even when
the species changes - the face of the dog has certain unique
features that are well preserved and melded with the tar-
get species. Other property modiﬁcations are possible, such
as material modiﬁcation (e.g. “a transparent [V] teapot” in
Figure 7). Some are harder than others and depend on the
prior of the base generation model.
4.5. Limitations
We illustrate some failure models of our method in Fig-
ure 9. The ﬁrst is related to not being able to accurately
generate the prompted context. Possible reasons are a weak
prior for these contexts, or difﬁculty in generating both the
subject and speciﬁed concept together due to low proba-
bility of co-occurrence in the training set. The second is
context-appearance entanglement, where the appearance of
the subject changes due to the prompted context, exempli-
ﬁed in Figure 9 with color changes of the backpack. Third,
we also observe overﬁtting to the real images that happen
when the prompt is similar to the original setting in which
the subject was seen.
Other limitations are that some subjects are easier to
learn than others (e.g. dogs and cats). Occasionally, with
subjects that are rarer, the model is unable to support as
many subject variations. Finally, there is also variability
in the ﬁdelity of the subject and some generated images
might contain hallucinated subject features, depending on
the strength of the model prior, and the complexity of the
semantic modiﬁcation.
5. Conclusions
We presented an approach for synthesizing novel rendi-
tions of a subject using a few images of the subject and the
guidance of a text prompt. Our key idea is to embed a given
subject instance in the output domain of a text-to-image dif-
fusion model by binding the subject to a unique identiﬁer.
Remarkably - this ﬁne-tuning process can work given only
3-5 subject images, making the technique particularly ac-
cessible. We demonstrated a variety of applications with
animals and objects in generated photorealistic scenes, in
most cases indistinguishable from real images.
6. Acknowledgement
We thank Rinon Gal, Adi Zicher, Ron Mokady, Bill
Freeman, Dilip Krishnan, Huiwen Chang and Daniel
Cohen-Or for their valuable inputs that helped improve this
work, and to Mohammad Norouzi, Chitwan Saharia and
William Chan for providing us with their support and the
pretrained Imagen models.
Finally, a special thanks to
David Salesin for his feedback, advice and for his support
for the project.
References
[1] Unsplash. https://unsplash.com/.
[2] Rameen Abdal, Peihao Zhu, John Femiani, Niloy J Mitra,
and Peter Wonka. Clip2stylegan: Unsupervised extraction
of stylegan edit directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05219,
2021.
[3] Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended
latent diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02779, 2022.
[4] Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended
diffusion for text-driven editing of natural images. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 18208–18218, 2022.
[5] Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kas-
ten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-driven layered image
and video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02491, 2022.

[6] Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter
Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Pratul P. Srinivasan.
Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neu-
ral radiance ﬁelds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 5855–
5864, October 2021.
[7] David Bau, Alex Andonian, Audrey Cui, YeonHwan Park,
Ali Jahanian, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Paint by
word, 2021.
[8] Mark Boss, Andreas Engelhardt, Abhishek Kar, Yuanzhen
Li, Deqing Sun, Jonathan T Barron, Hendrik Lensch, and
Varun Jampani.
Samurai: Shape and material from un-
constrained real-world arbitrary image collections.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.15768, 2022.
[9] Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large
scale gan training for high ﬁdelity natural image synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
[10] Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Herv´e J´egou,
Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Emerg-
ing properties in self-supervised vision transformers.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 9650–9660, 2021.
[11] Arantxa Casanova, Marlene Careil, Jakob Verbeek, Michal
Drozdzal,
and Adriana Romero Soriano.
Instance-
conditioned gan. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 34:27517–27529, 2021.
[12] Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune
Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Conditioning method for
denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.02938, 2021.
[13] Wenyan Cong, Jianfu Zhang, Li Niu, Liu Liu, Zhixin Ling,
Weiyuan Li, and Liqing Zhang.
Dovenet: Deep image
harmonization via domain veriﬁcation.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 8394–8403, 2020.
[14] Katherine Crowson,
Stella
Biderman,
Daniel Kornis,
Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Castricato, and Ed-
ward Raff.
Vqgan-clip: Open domain image generation
and editing with natural language guidance. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.08583, 2022.
[15] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models
beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
[16] Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng,
Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou, Zhou Shao,
Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image gen-
eration via transformers. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 34:19822–19835, 2021.
[17] Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Wenyi Hong, and Jie Tang.
Cogview2: Faster and better text-to-image generation via hi-
erarchical transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14217,
2022.
[18] Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming
transformers for high-resolution image synthesis.
In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 12873–12883, 2021.
[19] Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin,
Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman.
Make-a-scene: Scene-
based text-to-image generation with human priors.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.13131, 2022.
[20] Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patash-
nik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-
Or.
An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-
image generation using textual inversion.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
[21] Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik,
and Daniel Cohen-Or.
Stylegan-nada:
Clip-guided do-
main adaptation of image generators.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.00946, 2021.
[22] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
[23] Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kﬁr Aberman,
Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-to-prompt im-
age editing with cross attention control.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.01626, 2022.
[24] Tobias Hinz, Stefan Heinrich, and Stefan Wermter. Semantic
object accuracy for generative text-to-image synthesis. IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
2020.
[25] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffu-
sion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[26] Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet,
Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans. Cascaded diffusion
models for high ﬁdelity image generation. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 23:47–1, 2022.
[27] Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T. Barron, Pieter
Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided object gen-
eration with dream ﬁelds. 2022.
[28] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik H¨ark¨onen,
Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Alias-free
generative adversarial networks. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 34:852–863, 2021.
[29] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 4401–4410, 2019.
[30] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
Analyzing and improv-
ing the image quality of stylegan.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 8110–8119, 2020.
[31] Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Dif-
fusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models for robust image
manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2426–
2435, 2022.
[32] Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A sim-
ple and language independent subword tokenizer and deto-
kenizer for neural text processing. In EMNLP (Demonstra-
tion), 2018.

[33] Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye.
Clipstyler:
Image
style transfer with a single text condition.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.00374, 2021.
[34] Jason Lee, Kyunghyun Cho, and Douwe Kiela. Countering
language drift via visual grounding. In EMNLP, 2019.
[35] Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip
Torr.
Controllable text-to-image generation.
Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[36] Wenbo Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Lei Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang,
Xiaodong He, Siwei Lyu, and Jianfeng Gao. Object-driven
text-to-image synthesis via adversarial training. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 12174–12182, 2019.
[37] Yijun Li, Richard Zhang, Jingwan Lu, and Eli Shechtman.
Few-shot image generation with elastic weight consolida-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02780, 2020.
[38] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Ersin Yumer, Oliver Wang, Eli Shechtman,
and Simon Lucey.
St-gan: Spatial transformer generative
adversarial networks for image compositing.
In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 9455–9464, 2018.
[39] Xihui Liu, Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Gong Zhang,
Arman Chopikyan, Yuxiao Hu, Humphrey Shi, Anna
Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. More control for free! im-
age synthesis with semantic diffusion guidance. 2021.
[40] Yuchen
Lu,
Soumye
Singhal,
Florian
Strub,
Aaron
Courville, and Olivier Pietquin. Countering language drift
with seeded iterated learning. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 6437–6447. PMLR, 2020.
[41] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance ﬁelds for view syn-
thesis. In European conference on computer vision, pages
405–421. Springer, 2020.
[42] Sangwoo Mo, Minsu Cho, and Jinwoo Shin. Freeze the dis-
criminator: a simple baseline for ﬁne-tuning gans. In CVPR
AI for Content Creation Workshop, 2020.
[43] Ron Mokady, Omer Tov, Michal Yarom, Oran Lang, Inbar
Mosseri, Tali Dekel, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Michal Irani.
Self-distilled stylegan: Towards generation from internet
photos.
In Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques Conference Proceedings, pages
1–9, 2022.
[44] Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav
Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and
Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation
and editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
[45] Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved
denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8162–8171. PMLR,
2021.
[46] Yotam Nitzan, Kﬁr Aberman, Qiurui He, Orly Liba, Michal
Yarom, Yossi Gandelsman, Inbar Mosseri, Yael Pritch, and
Daniel Cohen-Or. Mystyle: A personalized generative prior.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17272, 2022.
[47] Utkarsh Ojha, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, Alexei A Efros,
Yong Jae Lee, Eli Shechtman, and Richard Zhang. Few-shot
image generation via cross-domain correspondence. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 10743–10752, 2021.
[48] Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or,
and Dani Lischinski. Styleclip: Text-driven manipulation of
stylegan imagery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.17249, 2021.
[49] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Milden-
hall.
Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
[50] Tingting Qiao, Jing Zhang, Duanqing Xu, and Dacheng Tao.
Learn, imagine and create: Text-to-image generation from
prior knowledge. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 32, 2019.
[51] Tingting Qiao, Jing Zhang, Duanqing Xu, and Dacheng Tao.
Mirrorgan: Learning text-to-image generation by redescrip-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1505–1514,
2019.
[52] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learn-
ing transferable visual models from natural language super-
vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
[53] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee,
Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, Pe-
ter J Liu, et al.
Exploring the limits of transfer learning
with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
21(140):1–67, 2020.
[54] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu,
and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image gen-
eration with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125,
2022.
[55] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray,
Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever.
Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
[56] Esther Robb, Wen-Sheng Chu, Abhishek Kumar, and Jia-
Bin Huang. Few-shot adaptation of generative adversarial
networks. ArXiv, abs/2010.11943, 2020.
[57] Daniel Roich, Ron Mokady, Amit H. Bermano, and Daniel
Cohen-Or. Pivotal tuning for latent-based editing of real im-
ages. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2022.
[58] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-resolution image syn-
thesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
[59] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[60] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee,
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David Fleet, and Mohammad
Norouzi.
Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models.
In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings, pages 1–
10, 2022.
[61] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala
Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed

Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha
Gontijo-Lopes, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet,
and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image dif-
fusion models with deep language understanding.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
[62] Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Sali-
mans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Image super-
resolution via iterative reﬁnement. arXiv:2104.07636, 2021.
[63] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan,
and Surya Ganguli.
Deep unsupervised learning using
nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
[64] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denois-
ing diffusion implicit models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2020.
[65] Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by esti-
mating gradients of the data distribution. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[66] Yang Song and Stefano Ermon.
Improved techniques for
training score-based generative models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33:12438–12448, 2020.
[67] Ming Tao, Hao Tang, Songsong Wu, Nicu Sebe, Xiao-Yuan
Jing, Fei Wu, and Bingkun Bao. Df-gan: Deep fusion gener-
ative adversarial networks for text-to-image synthesis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.05865, 2020.
[68] Dor Verbin, Peter Hedman, Ben Mildenhall, Todd Zickler,
Jonathan T. Barron, and Pratul P. Srinivasan.
Ref-NeRF:
Structured view-dependent appearance for neural radiance
ﬁelds. CVPR, 2022.
[69] Yaxing Wang, Abel Gonzalez-Garcia, David Berga, Luis
Herranz, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Joost van de Weijer.
Minegan: Effective knowledge transfer from gans to target
domains with few images.
In The IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June
2020.
[70] Huikai Wu, Shuai Zheng, Junge Zhang, and Kaiqi Huang.
Gp-gan: Towards realistic high-resolution image blending.
In Proceedings of the 27th ACM international conference on
multimedia, pages 2487–2495, 2019.
[71] Weihao Xia, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, and Baoyuan Wu.
Tedigan: Text-guided diverse face image generation and ma-
nipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 2256–2265,
2021.
[72] Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gun-
jan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Alexander Ku, Yin-
fei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al.
Scaling autoregres-
sive models for content-rich text-to-image generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
[73] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman,
and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep
features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018.
[74] Zizhao Zhang, Yuanpu Xie, and Lin Yang.
Photographic
text-to-image synthesis with a hierarchically-nested adver-
sarial network. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 6199–6208,
2018.

Supplementary Material
Background
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Diffusion models are
probabilistic generative models that are trained to learn a
data distribution by the gradual denoising of a variable sam-
pled from a Gaussian distribution. Speciﬁcally, this cor-
responds to learning the reverse process of a ﬁxed-length
Markovian forward process. In simple terms, a conditional
diffusion model ˆxθ is trained using a squared error loss to
denoise a variably-noised image zt := αtx+σtϵ as follows:
Ex,c,ϵ,t

wt∥ˆxθ(αtx + σtϵ, c) −x∥2
2

(3)
where x is the ground-truth image, c is a conditioning
vector (e.g., obtained from a text prompt), ϵ ∼N(0, I)
is a noise term and αt, σt, wt are terms that control the
noise schedule and sample quality, and are functions of
the diffusion process time t ∼U([0, 1]).
At inference
time, the diffusion model is sampled by iteratively denois-
ing zt1 ∼N(0, I) using either the deterministic DDIM [64]
or the stochastic ancestral sampler [25]. Intermediate points
zt1, . . . , ztT , where 1 = t1 > · · · > tT = 0, are generated,
with decreasing noise levels. These points, ˆxt
0 := ˆxθ(zt, c),
are functions of the x-predictions.
Recent state-of-the-art text-to-image diffusion models
use cascaded diffusion models in order to generate high-
resolution images from text [54, 61].
Speciﬁcally, [61]
uses a base text-to-image model with 64x64 output resolu-
tion, and two text-conditional super-resolution (SR) models
64 × 64 →256 × 256 and 256 × 256 →1024 × 1024.
Ramesh et al. [54] use a similar conﬁguration, with uncon-
ditional SR models. A key component of high-quality sam-
ple generations from [61] is the use of noise conditioning
augmentation [26] for the two SR modules. This consists in
corrupting the intermediate image using noise with speciﬁc
strength, and then conditioning the SR model on the level
of corruption. Saharia et al. [61] select Gaussian noise as
the form of augmentation.
Other recent state-of-the-art text-to-image diffusion
models, such as Stable Diffusion [59], use a single diffusion
model to generate high-resolution images. Speciﬁcally, the
forward and backward diffusion processes occur in a lower-
dimensional latent space and an encoder-decoder architec-
ture is trained on a large image dataset to translate images
into latent codes. At inference time, a random noise latent
code goes through the backward diffusion process and the
pre-trained decoder is used to generate the ﬁnal image. Our
method can be naturally applied to this scenario, where the
U-Net (and possibly the text encoder) are trained, and the
decoder is ﬁxed.
Vocabulary Encoding
The details of text-conditioning in
text-to-image diffusion models are of high importance for
visual quality and semantic ﬁdelity. Ramesh et al. [54] use
CLIP text embeddings that are translated into image em-
beddings using a learned prior, while Saharia et al. [61] use
a pre-trained T5-XXL language model [53]. In our work,
we use the latter. Language models like T5-XXL generate
embeddings of a tokenized text prompt, and vocabulary en-
coding is an important pre-processing step for prompt em-
bedding. In order to transform a text prompt P into a con-
ditioning embedding c, the text is ﬁrst tokenized using a
tokenizer f using a learned vocabulary. Following [61], we
use the SentencePiece tokenizer [32]. After tokenizing a
prompt P using tokenizer f we obtain a ﬁxed-length vector
f(P). The language model Γ is conditioned on this token
identiﬁer vector to produce an embedding c := Γ(f(P)).
Finally, the text-to-image diffusion model is directly condi-
tioned on c.
Dataset
Our dataset includes 30 subjects. We separate each sub-
ject into two categories: objects and live subjects/pets. 21 of
the 30 subjects are objects, and 9 are live subjects/pets. We
provide one sample image for each of the subjects in Fig-
ure 5. Images for this dataset were collected by the authors
or sourced from Unsplash [1].
We also collected 25 prompts: 20 recontextualization
prompts and 5 property modiﬁcation prompts for objects.
10 recontextualization, 10 accessorization, and 5 property
modiﬁcation prompts for live subjects/pets. Prompts are
shown in Figure 10
For the evaluation suite we generate four images per sub-
ject and per prompt, totaling 3,000 images. This allows us
to robustly measure performances and generalization capa-
bilities of a method. We make our dataset and evaluation
protocol publicly available on the project webpage for fu-
ture use in evaluating subject-driven generation.
Subject Fidelity Metrics
In the main paper we comment on the superiority of our
proposed DINO metric in terms of subject ﬁdelity. We hy-
pothesize that this is because DINO is, in essence, trained
in a self-supervised manner to distinguish different images
from each other modulo data augmentations.
This is in
contrast to the CLIP-I metric, where CLIP is trained with
text-image pairs and encodes more descriptive information
about images - but not necessarily ﬁne details that are not
present in the text annotations. We give an example in Fig-
ure 11, where the ﬁrst column contains a reference real im-
age, the second column a different real image, the third col-
umn a DreamBooth generated image and the last column
an image generated using Textual Inversion. We compare
the 2nd, 3rd and 4th image to the real reference image us-
ing the CLIP-I and DINO metrics.
We observe that the

Figure 10. Prompts. Evaluation prompts for both objects and live subjects.
2nd real image obtains both the highest CLIP-I and DINO
scores. The DreamBooth sample looks much more simi-
lar to the reference sample than the Textual Inversion sam-
ple, yet the CLIP-I score for the Textual Inversion sample
is much higher than the DreamBooth sample. However, we
can see that the DINO similarity is higher for the Dream-
Booth sample - which more closely tracks human evalua-
tion of subject ﬁdelity. In order to quantitatively test this,
we compute correlations between DINO/CLIP-I scores and
normalized human preference scores. DINO has a Pearson
correlation coeff. of 0.32 with human preference (vs. 0.27
for the CLIP-I metric used in [20]), with a very low p-value
of 9.44 × 10−30.
User Study
Below we include the full instructions used for our user
study. For subject ﬁdelity:
• Read the task carefully, inspect the reference items and
then inspect the generated items.
• Select which of the two generated items (A or B) re-
produces the identity (e.g. item type and details) of the
reference item.
• The subject might be wearing accessories (e.g. hats,
outﬁts). These should not affect your answer. Do not
take them into account.
• If you’re not sure, select Cannot Determine / Both
Equally.
For text ﬁdelity:
• Read the task carefully, inspect the reference text and
then inspect the generated items.
• Select which of the two generated items (A or B) is
best described by the reference text.
• If you’re not sure, select Cannot Determine / Both
Equally.
For each study we asked 72 users to answer questionnaires
of 25 comparative questions (3 users per questionnaire), to-
taling 1800 answers - with 600 image pairs evaluated.
Additional Applications and Examples
Additional Samples
We provide a large amount of addi-
tional random samples in an annex HTML ﬁle. We compare
real images, to DreamBooth generated images using Ima-
gen and Stable Diffusion as well as images generated using
Textual Inversion on Stable Diffusion.
Recontextualization
We show additional high-quality
examples of recontextualization in Figure 12.
Art Renditions
We show additional examples of original
artistic renditions of a personalized model in Figure 13.
Expression Manipulation
Our method allows for new
image generation of the subject with modiﬁed expressions
that are not seen in the original set of subject images. We
show examples in Figure 14. The range of expressiveness
is high, ranging from negative to positive valence emotions
and different levels of arousal. In all examples, the unique-
ness of the subject dog is preserved - speciﬁcally, the asym-
metric white streak on its face remains in all generated im-
ages.

Figure 11. CLIP-I vs. DINO Metrics. The DreamBooth CLIP-I similarity to the reference image is lower than that of the Textual
Inversion sample, even though the DreamBooth subject looks more similar to the reference subject. The DINO metric more closely tracks
human evaluation of subject ﬁdelity here.
Novel View Synthesis
We show more viewpoints for
novel view synthesis in Figure 15, along with prompts used
to generate the samples.
Accessorization
An interesting capability stemming from
the strong compositional prior of the generation model is the
ability to accessorize subjects. In Figure 16 we show exam-
ples of accessorization of a Chow Chow dog. We prompt
the model with a sentence of the form: “a [V] [class noun]
wearing [accessory]”. In this manner, we are able to ﬁt dif-
ferent accessories onto this dog - with aesthetically pleasing
results. Note that the identity of the dog is preserved in all
frames, and subject-accessory contact and articulation are
realistic.
Property Modiﬁcation
We are able to modify subject in-
stance properties. For example we can include a color ad-
jective in the prompt sentence “a [color adjective] [V] [class
noun]”. In that way, we can generate novel instances of
our subject with different colors. The generated scene can
be very similar to the original scene, or it can be changed
given a descriptive prompt. We show color changes of a
car in the ﬁrst row of Figure 17. We select similar view-
points for effect, but we can generate different viewpoints
of the car with different colors in different scenarios. This
is a simple example of property modiﬁcation, but more se-
mantically complex property modiﬁcations can be achieved
using our method. For example, we show crosses between a
speciﬁc Chow Chow dog and different animal species in the
bottom row of Figure 17. We prompt the model with sen-
tences of the following structure: “a cross of a [V] dog and
a [target species]”. In particular, we can see in this example
that the identity of the dog is well preserved even when the
species changes - the face of the dog has certain individual
properties that are well preserved and melded with the target
species. Other property modiﬁcations are possible, such as
material modiﬁcation (e.g. a dog made out of stone). Some
are harder than others and depend on the prior of the base
generation model.
Comic Book Generation
In addition to photorealistic im-
ages, our method is able to capture the appearance of drawn
media and more. In Figure 18 we present, to the best of our
knowledge, the ﬁrst instance of a full comic with a persis-
tent character generated by a generative model. Each comic
frame was generated using a descriptive prompt (e.g “a [V]
cartoon grabbing a fork and a knife saying “time to eat””).
Additional Experiments
Prior Preservation Loss
Here we show qualitative examples of how our prior
preservation loss (PPL) conserves variability in the prior
and show sample results in Figure 19. We verify that a
vanilla model is able to generate a large variety of dogs,
while a naively ﬁne-tuned model on the subject dog ex-
hibits language drift and generates our subject dog given
the prompt “a dog”. Our proposed loss preserves the vari-
ability of the prior and the model is able to generate new
instances of our dog given a prompt of the style “a [V] dog”
but also varied instances of dogs given a “a dog” prompt.
Effect of Training Images
Here we run an experiment on the effects of the num-
ber of input images for model personalization. Speciﬁcally,
we train models for two subjects, 5 models per subject with
input images ranging from 1 to 5. We generate 4 images
for 10 different recontextualization prompts for each sub-
ject. We present qualitative results in Figure 20. We can
observe that for some subjects that are more common, and
lie more strongly in the distribution of the diffusion model,
such as the selected Corgi dog, we are able to accurately

Method
1
2
3
4
5
Backpack
0.494
0.515
0.596
0.604
0.597
Dog
0.798
0.851
0.871
0.876
0.864
Table 5. Effect of the number of input images on subject ﬁdelity
(DINO).
Method
1
2
3
4
5
Backpack
0.798
0.851
0.871
0.876
0.864
Dog
0.646
0.683
0.734
0.740
0.730
Table 6. Effect of the number of input images on prompt ﬁdelity
(CLIP-T).
capture the appearance using only two images - and some-
times only one, given careful hyperparameter choice. For
objects that are more rare, such as the selected backpack,
we need more samples to accurately preserve the subject
and to recontextualize it to diverse settings. Our quantita-
tive results support these conclusions - we present the DINO
subject ﬁdelity metric in Table 5 and the CLIP-T prompt ﬁ-
delity metric in Table 6. For both subjects we see that the
optimal amount of input images for subject and prompt is
4. This number can vary depending on the subject and we
settle on 3-5 images for model personalization.
Personalized Instance-Speciﬁc Super-Resolution
and Low-level Noise Augmentation for Imagen
While the text-to-image diffusion model controls for
most visual semantics, the super-resolution (SR) models
are essential to achieve photorealistic content and to pre-
serve subject instance details. We ﬁnd that if SR networks
are used without ﬁne-tuning, the generated output can con-
tain artifacts since the SR models might not be familiar
with certain details or textures of the subject instance, or
the subject instance might have hallucinated incorrect fea-
tures, or missing details. Figure 21 (bottom row) shows
some sample output images with no ﬁne-tuning of SR mod-
els, where the model hallucinates some high-frequency de-
tails. We ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuning the 64 × 64 →256 × 256
SR model is essential for most subjects, and ﬁne-tuning the
256 × 256 →1024 × 1024 model can beneﬁt some subject
instances with high levels of ﬁne-grained detail.
We ﬁnd results to be suboptimal if the training recipes
and test parameters of Saharia et al. [61] are used to ﬁne-
tune the SR models with the given few shots of a subject
instance. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that maintaining the original
level of noise augmentation used to train the SR networks
leads to the blurring of high-frequency patterns of the sub-
ject and of the environment. See Figure 21 (middle row)
for sample generations. In order to faithfully reproduce the
subject instance, we reduce the level of noise augmentation
from 10−3 to 10−5 during ﬁne-tuning of the 256 × 256 SR
model. With this small modiﬁcation, We are able to recover
ﬁne-grained details of the subject instance. We show how
using lower noise to train the super-resolution models im-
proves ﬁdelity. Speciﬁcally, we show in Figure 21 that if the
super-resolution models are not ﬁne-tuned, we observe hal-
lucination of high-frequency patterns on the subject which
hurts identity preservation. Further, if we use the ground-
truth noise augmentation level used for training the Imagen
256 × 256 model (10−3), we obtain blurred and non-crisp
details. If the noise used to train the SR model is reduced
to 10−5, then we conserve a large amount of detail without
pattern hallucination or blurring.
Comparisons
We include additional qualitative comparisons with Gal
et al. [20] in Figure 22. For this comparison, we train our
model on the training images of two objects appear in the
teaser of their work (headless sculpture and cat toy) kindly
provided by Gal et al. [20], and apply the prompts suggested
in their paper. For prompts where they present several gen-
erated images, we handpicked their best sample (with the
highest image quality and morphological similarity to the
subject). We ﬁnd that our work can generate the same se-
mantic variations of these unique objects, with a high em-
phasis on preserving the subject identity, as can be seen, for
instance, by the detailed patterns of the cat sculpture that
are preserved.
Next, we show comparisons of recontextualization of a
subject clock, with distinctive features using our method
and prompt engineering using vanilla Imagen [61] and the
public API of DALL-E 2 [54]. After multiple iterations us-
ing both models, we settle for the base prompt “retro style
yellow alarm clock with a white clock face and a yellow
number three on the lower right part of the clock face” to
describe all of the important features of the subject clock
example. We ﬁnd that while DALL-E 2 and vanilla Imagen
are able to generate retro-style yellow alarm clocks, they
struggle to represent a number 3 on the clock face, distinct
from the clock face numbers. In general, we ﬁnd that it is
very hard to control ﬁne-grained details of subject appear-
ance, even with exhaustive prompt engineering. Also, we
ﬁnd that context can bleed into the appearance of our sub-
ject instance. We show the results in Figure 23, and can
observe that our method conserves ﬁne-grained details of
the subject instance such as the shape, the clock face font,
and the large yellow number three on the clock face, among
others.
Societal Impact
This project aims to provide users with an effective tool
for synthesizing personal subjects (animals, objects) in dif-
ferent contexts. While general text-to-image models might
be biased towards speciﬁc attributes when synthesizing im-

ages from text, our approach enables the user to get a bet-
ter reconstruction of their desirable subjects. On contrary,
malicious parties might try to use such images to mislead
viewers. This is a common issue, existing in other genera-
tive models approaches or content manipulation techniques.
Future research in generative modeling, and speciﬁcally of
personalized generative priors, must continue investigating
and revalidating these concerns.

Figure 12. Additional recontextualization samples of a backpack, vase, and teapot subject instances. We are able to generate images
of the subject instance in different environments, with high preservation of subject details and realistic interaction between the scene and
the subject. We display the conditioning prompts below each image.

Figure 13. Additional artistic renderings of a dog instance in the style of famous painters. We remark that many of the generated poses,
e.g., the Michelangelo renditions, were not seen in the training set. We also note that some renditions seem to have novel compositions and
faithfully imitate the style of the painter.
Figure 14. Expression manipulation of a dog instance. Our technique can synthesize various expressions that do not appear in the input
images, demonstrating the extrapolation power of the model. Note the unique asymmetric white streak on the subject dog’s face.

Figure 15. Text-guided view synthesis. Our technique can synthesize images with speciﬁed viewpoints for a subject cat (left to right: top,
bottom, side, and back views). Note that the generated poses are different from the input poses, and the background changes in a realistic
manner given a pose change. We also highlight the preservation of complex fur patterns on the subject cat’s forehead.
Figure 16. Outﬁtting a dog with accessories. The identity of the subject is preserved and many different outﬁts or accessories can be
applied to the dog given a prompt of type “a [V] dog wearing a police/chef/witch outﬁt”. We observe a realistic interaction between the
subject dog and the outﬁts or accessories, as well as a large variety of possible options.
