 
1 
 
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback:  
Whose Culture, Whose Values, Whose Perspectives?  
Kristian González Barman✝a , Simon Lohse✝♠ b & Henk de Regtb 
✝ Authors contributed equally to this work 
♠ Corresponding author 
a Centre for Logic and Philosophy of Science, Department of Philosophy and Moral Sciences, Ghent 
University, Blandijnberg 2, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. 
b Institute for Science in Society, Faculty of Science, Radboud University, the Netherlands. 
 
E-mails: KristianCampbell.GonzalezBarman@Ugent.be,  simon.lohse@ru.nl ,   henk.deregt@ru.nl   
 
 
Abstract: We argue for the epistemic and ethical advantages of pluralism in Reinforcement Learning 
from Human Feedback (RLHF) in the context of Large Language Models (LLM). Drawing on social 
epistemology and pluralist philosophy of science, we suggest ways in which RHLF can be made more 
responsive to human needs and how we can address challenges along the way. The paper concludes 
with an agenda for change, i.e. concrete, actionable steps to improve LLM development. 
 
1.Introduction 
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is an increasingly common technique in artificial 
intelligence (AI) where a model learns by receiving feedback from humans rather than solely relying 
on a predefined reward function. This approach is particularly useful when designing AI systems for 
tasks where it is difficult to specify a precise reward function or when it is important to align the 
model's behaviour with certain human expectations and values. For instance, RLHF has notably 
improved language models for context-aware text generation (Ziegler et al. 2020) and taught robots 
to navigate cluttered environments (Henry et al. 2010). 
RLHF is commonly employed in the later stages of fine-tuning models, particularly in the development 
of prominent Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-3.5 or GPT-4. Initially, these models undergo 
training using vast text corpora to grasp a broad range of language patterns and contexts. This 
foundational training is supplemented by task-specific fine-tuning, where the models are adjusted to 
excel in particular applications, such as understanding and generating dialogues. The refinement 
process is then further enhanced through RLHF. The RLHF process often involves people evaluating 
and ranking potential outcomes to build a classification model. This model is designed to predict if a 
human would find a specific output acceptable. The initial model undergoes refinement through a 

 
2 
 
step-by-step process where it can use this classification model for feedback, allowing for 
improvement. This iterative process enables the model to better align with human judgement over 
time. 
One question that becomes significant in this context is what role the composition of the human 
feedback group plays in the process. After all, a certain diversity in composition seems to be a clear 
advantage1 in the development of models like ChatGPT. The feedback providers' background 
knowledge and their social, cultural and political perspectives may (or so we will argue) significantly 
influence the model – and a lack of diversity among individuals may lead to a model that is overly 
geared towards only specific expectations, potentially overlooking different but also important values 
and perspectives. Accordingly, too much homogeneity may raise ethical concerns and also create 
epistemic limitations, as the model may generate outputs that are hardly broadly acceptable, 
applicable or insightful. One key insight that emerges from our analysis is that achieving balance in 
LLM outputs need not require each individual evaluator to provide balanced feedback. Rather, more 
robust and nuanced outputs can emerge from the interplay of multiple distinct perspectives, each 
potentially representing a clear stance or worldview. 
Despite the apparent benefits of diversity in RLHF, the philosophical underpinnings of why and how it 
may improve model performance have not been thoroughly explored. This paper offers an analytical 
perspective on the impact of diverse feedback on LLM development. Our investigation is motivated 
by two distinct but intertwined objectives: first, to elucidate the complex interplay between diversity, 
balance, and reliability in the development of LLMs employing RLHF. Second, to explore challenges for 
increasing diversity in RLHF and point to potential ways for managing these challenges. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of the landscape of RLHF and 
associated problems, highlighting the need for diversity in feedback. Section 3 introduces ideas from 
philosophy of science and social epistemology which can serve as useful conceptual tools to 
understand and manage the identified problems. Section 4 develops initial ideas about how RLHF can 
be improved by making it more pluralistic and discusses open questions and trade-offs that need to 
be addressed to make progress along these lines. The final section concludes with a brief summary 
and an agenda for making RLHF more pluralistic. 
 
1 For instance, Yamagata, McConville, and Santos-Rodriguez (2021) show that by incorporating feedback from a diverse 
group of trainers with varying skill levels and reliability into a Bayesian approach, it's possible to enhance the accuracy 
and robustness of Reinforcement Learning systems, even in the presence of unreliable sources. For an important 
theoretical perspective on the relationship between diversity and collective performance, see the "Diversity Trumps 
Ability Theorem" developed by Scott and Page and discussed in Landemore (2013); cf. Thompson, 2014 and Brennan, 
2021 for critical discussions of the applicability and scope of the theorem. 

 
3 
 
 
2. Reinforcement learning and associated challenges. 
RLHF is a useful method to align AI systems with human objectives, especially in the last stages of fine-
tuning of state-of-the-art Large Language Models such as OpenAI's GPT-4 or Meta’s LLama 3. This 
technique has become central in adapting AI models to complex, human-centric expectations and 
preferences. The clearest example of this was Davinci 3.5 (the first version of ChatGPT), which was far 
more safe, “user-friendly”, and well received in terms of dialogic conversation style than GPT3.  
Originating from revealed preference theory in economics, RLHF was adopted in machine learning for 
applications in human-computer interaction and reinforcement learning2. The standard methodology 
for RLHF was popularised in 2017 (Christiano et al. 2017) and has significantly influenced the deep 
reinforcement learning community. Note that LLMs are fundamentally stochastic machines that are 
proficient at generating text rather than systems that track or contain referential knowledge. While 
they can generate remarkably coherent and seemingly knowledgeable outputs, they operate through 
statistical pattern matching rather than by maintaining or accessing a database of facts about the 
world. This fundamental characteristic of LLMs has important implications for RLHF, as the feedback 
process aims to shape probabilistic language generation patterns rather than to instil or correct actual 
knowledge (we will come back to this below).  
The advantages of RLHF are manifold. It enables humans to communicate goals to AI systems without 
the need for having a previously defined reward function. This not only makes reward shaping implicit 
and intuitive, but mitigates reward hacking (Casper et al. 2023), where an AI might exploit loopholes 
in a reward function to achieve high scores without actually fulfilling the task the reward function is a 
proxy for. Furthermore, RLHF facilitates a dynamic learning process where AI models can continuously 
evolve based on real-time human feedback, which enables companies with a large user base to 
improve their models with faster cycles. This ongoing interaction results in AI systems that are more 
aligned with the values and expectations of the model’s users, ensuring their relevance and utility. 
Consequently, AI systems that incorporate RLHF might be better equipped to operate in complex 
moral and social landscapes, making them more trustworthy and reliable for a broad range of 
applications. 
 
2 Historically, RLHF can be situated within the broader framework of inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) approaches. 
IRL, first formalized by Ng & Russell (2000), addresses the fundamental problem of recovering an unknown reward 
function from observed optimal behaviour. While both RLHF and IRL aim to learn from human input, IRL traditionally 
focused on inferring reward functions from demonstrated optimal behaviour, whereas RLHF leverages direct human 
feedback on model outputs. This distinction is particularly relevant as RLHF does not assume optimal demonstrations 
but rather works with potentially noisy human preferences and feedback. 

 
4 
 
The process of RLHF, involves three sequential steps (Casper et al. 2023): Feedback Collection, Reward 
Modeling, and Policy Optimization. Feedback Collection involves the human assessment of model 
outputs, followed by Reward Modeling, where these assessments are used to train a reward model 
via supervised learning aiming to replicate the preferences of human evaluations. The final step, Policy 
Optimization, optimizes the pretrained LLM3 to generate outputs positively rated by the reward 
model. The term ‘policy’ here refers to the updated LLM, which uses some form of reinforcement 
learning to improve the pretrained LLM. 
To illustrate this, imagine an AI designed to write creative stories undergoing this three-step process. 
Initially, humans evaluate the stories the AI produces (e.g. based on creativity, coherence, and 
emotional impact). These evaluations guide the training of a reward model that predicts whether a 
story is appealing to humans (i.e., whether human evaluators would give it a good score). Finally, the 
AI's story-writing process is optimised based on feedback from the reward model, enabling it to 
produce narratives that better resonate with human readers, thus improving its ability to craft 
engaging and coherent stories. 
Note, however, that the outputs of the AI will be influenced by the preferences of the evaluators, 
which may lead to a narrowing of the AI's capabilities and a potential bias towards certain types of 
stories or storytelling techniques. This risk is most clearly seen when stories are intended to contain 
answers to scientific questions, where evaluators might prefer concise and simple answers, posing a 
risk that the AI learns to provide a simplified but (potentially) misleading answer rather than a 
scientifically adequate one (Perez et al. 2022; see also Barman et al. 2024).  In its most extreme form, 
this might involve giving not just simplified, but wrong answers altogether; for instance, the model 
may "hallucinate" responses to avoid answering that it does not know as this might be rated poorly. 
While this result could be seen as a simple consequence of prioritising user satisfaction, it may come 
at the expense of other values such as scientific accuracy and reliability. Given these (as well as other) 
potential trade-offs, it becomes important to consider which values one should aim for.   
The human feedback used in RLHF includes, among others, label feedback, binary preference 
feedback, correction feedback, and language feedback. This involves tasks such as ranking outputs 
(e.g., in order of quality), choosing one output over another, providing explanations as to why a certain 
output is not correct (or how it could be improved), or providing an example of what the right output 
should be. Each feedback type has its distinct advantages and limitations, and there are multiple trade-
offs at play (e.g., between the difficulty of the task, the ability of gathering enough feedback given a 
 
3 It should be noted that before RLHF, there is usually a step of instruction fine-tuning, where the pre-trained LLM is 
refined on task-specific data, such as for dialogue generation. 

 
5 
 
certain budget, or the difficulty of having humans with enough skill to perform these tasks). Despite 
its widespread use, certain limitations of RLHF in fine-tuning LLMs are notable. Perez et al. (2022) point 
out that models fine-tuned using RLHF often display biases and can lead to the mirroring of certain 
ideologies. El-Mhamdi et al. (2023)  observe that these models could unintentionally reveal sensitive 
information. Furthermore, there is clear evidence of these models indeed producing hallucinated or 
inaccurate content (OpenAI et al. 2023). Moreover, RLHF doesn’t protect these models against 
adversarial attacks, including jailbreaking4 or prompt injection/extraction5 (Li et al. 2023). The 
response behaviour of these models can also be undesirable in several other ways. 
These problems are too multifaceted to address them in one paper and require different types of 
solutions. In the following, we will focus primarily on problems of RLHF that are related to the content 
level, i.e. on models that have been “tutored” by humans but may still (or rather: because of this) 
generate biased, inaccurate or in other ways problematic responses to user prompts. Here are some 
examples for what we have in mind, drawing from an overview of the issues by Casper et al. (2023): 
- 
RLHF can amplify biases and one-sided opinions of human evaluators, a phenomenon known 
as “sycophancy”. This issue worsens with larger models and is not effectively mitigated by the 
RLHF process. 
- 
RLHF can reinforce politically unbalanced judgements of the tutored models, an issue that 
seems to be associated with the demographic composition of the selected evaluators (Motoki 
et al. 2023).  
- 
Some LLMs have been observed to become less accurate over time which may be, at least in 
part, a consequence of RLHF where evaluators make mistakes in light of difficult topic areas.  
- 
The RLHF process may introduce unanticipated model drift (Metz, 2023; cf. Chen et al. 2023), 
meaning that the behaviour of the model might inadvertently shift from what was expected. 
- 
Evaluators can intentionally or unintentionally insert harmful data into RLHF systems, 
especially given the scale at which RLHF operates. An example would be a (malicious) actor 
providing high ratings for clearly unethical responses of an LLM. 
So what is at the heart of these problems? And how can we improve RLHF so that we can cope with 
them? Although there is probably no single answer to these questions, we argue that the outlined 
 
4 Jailbreaking refers to the process of exploiting a model to break its constraints or intended use cases, enabling it to 
produce outputs that were otherwise restricted or unintended. This could involve ‘tricking’ the model into generating 
harmful, biased, or prohibited content. 
5 Prompt injection/extraction involves manipulating the model's input (injection) or extracting sensitive information 
from it (extraction) by crafting inputs in a specific way. This could be used to reveal personal data the model has been 
exposed to during training or to cause the model to act in unpredictable or undesired ways. 

 
6 
 
epistemic and ethical challenges can best be understood through the lenses of social epistemology 
and pluralism, as a lack diversity of human feedback plays a crucial role in these problems, indicating 
that strengthening diversity – in the right way – may provide useful starting points for tackling the 
issues.   
 
3. Conceptual tools from philosophy of science and social epistemology 
Increasing diversity is an obvious remedy for some of the identified problems. Consider the issues of 
user biases and politically unbalanced judgements. It seems intuitive that increasing diversity of 
perspectives in RLHF might be a (partial) remedy for these specific issues. To improve the AI alignment 
process, it is critical to look beyond individual perspectives to encompass the broader norms, 
expectations, and values of various groups. However, to better understand the underlying reasons for 
this and also why pluralism might be promising to understand and address some of the other problems 
mentioned, it will be helpful to introduce three interrelated concepts from post-positivist philosophy 
of science and social epistemology (as they have been developed by Paul Feyerabend, Sandra Harding, 
Helen Longino and others; see Grasswick, 2018 for an overview). 
 
I. Social cognition: Feminist epistemologists such as Longino (1990) show that knowledge production 
is a communal, interactive process that is shaped by the way the process is organised on a social level. 
The way it is organised – in particular, the way in which the influence of values in the process is handled 
– can either promote or hamper the quality of the produced knowledge. While Longino makes this 
point in the context of science, the point generalises to reliable knowledge production per se. For 
instance, if you want to do a strategic SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis 
in an organisation you will likely arrive at a richer, more reliable picture if you systematically 
incorporate internal feedback on different levels of the organisational hierarchy than if you only rely 
on the input of the top management. Organising this process according to an ideal of inclusiveness 
makes things better (cf. Bengio et al. 2024). This example brings another aspect of the sociality of 
knowledge to the fore, namely that knowledge is often socially distributed - no member of the 
organisation has complete knowledge about the organisation, but this knowledge is distributed 
among members and certain roles  (the same applies to knowledge in scientific communities and many 
other contexts, see, e.g., Uygun Tunç 2023).  
 
II. Pluralistic triangulation: In order to truly understand a particular (epistemic or ethical) problem or 
question, it is useful to compare and contrast different points of view. Through this triangulation 
process, we can avoid myopia and errors in possible answers or solutions. This is because the extent 

 
7 
 
to which alternative points of view have blind spots or problematic assumptions often only becomes 
apparent through contrast. This simple yet powerful insight goes back at least to J.S. Mill’s defence of 
freedom of speech and has most forcefully been defended by Feyerabend (1975, 1999)6. Think of the 
recent Coronavirus crisis. It was precisely the public involvement of experts beyond medicine and 
epidemiology (such as social scientists and managers of retirement homes) in analysing the public 
crisis that helped to bring an excessive focus on health (rather than, e.g., social justice) and 
problematic assumptions about pandemic modelling to light. This was in part the result of 
triangulation of perspectives, approaches, and also of different value commitments (Bschir and Lohse 
2022).  
 
III. Positionality: People’s perspectives differ in systematic ways, influencing the ways individuals 
understand and interpret the world. More specifically, perspectives are shaped by personal 
experiences which in turn are connected to social position and role in society, most prominently by 
gender, social class and ethnicity. This insight from the sociology of knowledge can be considered as 
commonplace today. Feminist social epistemology, however, highlights two points. First, perspectives 
may not only affect ethical and political beliefs (as already Marx would have argued), but also areas of 
knowledge that typically do not seem to be affected by them, such as scientific knowledge (as shown 
by recent work in the philosophy of science; e.g. Massimi 2022). Second, the perspectives of 
marginalised or oppressed groups can be especially fruitful in discovering hidden and/or problematic 
aspects of a claim or state of affairs. Marginalised groups may sometimes be in a position where they 
can combine insider and outsider perspectives to enrich mainstream-dominated discourses and 
positions and to counteract negative consequences of marginalisation/oppression for knowledge 
production (Harding 1996; Intemann 2010) – which also raises the question of appropriate 
representation of different groups (see below). An example of this can be found in gender-biased 
explanations in primatology, which primarily emphasised the role of male animals in shaping social 
hierarchies, not taking into account the active role of female primates; a bias that only became 
apparent when more female researchers entered the field, who were sensitive to both sides of gender 
dominance due to their own positions in patriarchal societies  (Haraway 1984). 
 
Taken together, these concepts underline the importance of including multiple viewpoints from 
different social positions in a well-organised process if one is interested in a less error-prone and 
biased and more reliable and ethically robust understanding of many aspects of the world. Note that 
the above discussion of these concepts has an epistemic as well as an ethical dimension and implies 
 
6 See Lloyd (1997) for the connection between Mill and Feyerabend.  

 
8 
 
that these are not independent. This aligns with a prominent strand in the current philosophical 
debate about the role of values in science, criticizing the traditional ‘value-free ideal’ of science 
(Douglas 2009). This traditional view has been superseded by a more nuanced view defended by Kuhn 
(1977), which states that scientific research – and indeed any kind of truth-orientated knowledge 
production – should rely only on so-called epistemic values (such as accuracy and consistency) and 
exclude the influence of non-epistemic values (such as moral or political values). The reason would be 
that the former are conducive to finding objective truth, while the latter are inherently subjective.  
However, as Douglas and others have convincingly argued, even this more nuanced value-free ideal is 
untenable. One reason is that the distinction between epistemic and non-epistemic values cannot be 
drawn sharply (Rooney 2017). Another reason is that in many types of epistemic practices, non-
epistemic values are ineliminably involved in decisions about the acceptance or rejection of 
hypotheses, for example in statistical hypothesis testing (the so-called problem of inductive risk; see 
Douglas, 2009). While these insights from philosophy of science do not correspond directly to issues 
in AI, they support the idea that epistemic and non-epistemic (e.g. ethical) considerations are typically 
intertwined in knowledge production.7  
 
It might be objected, however, that the two dimensions need to be kept apart because conflating 
them runs the risk of threatening the objectivity of the knowledge production process. As regards the 
epistemic dimension, a pluralistic approach that includes different perspectives is more suitable to 
eliminate mistakes and biases and hence will produce more accurate and robust results. In a word, it 
will enhance the objectivity of the outcomes of the knowledge-production process. By contrast, 
allowing a plurality of moral values to affect the process will jeopardize the objectivity of the 
outcomes, or so the objectors might claim. We submit, however, that this objection holds water only 
if objectivity is defined as the outcome of reasoning processes in which non-epistemic values are 
absent. But, as Douglas (2009, 115-129) argues, objectivity can be achieved in various other ways, 
where it is important to note that the term ‘objectivity’ can apply to various aspects of the knowledge 
production process and that a key feature of objectivity is that it is a basis for trust. Douglas 
distinguishes eight senses of objectivity, of which the following two are especially relevant for our 
purposes.8 First, with respect to individual thought processes, objectivity can be achieved by “taking 
a position that is balanced or neutral with respect to a spectrum of values” (Douglas 2009, 123). This 
is called ‘value-neutral objectivity’. Douglas adds that it may be allowed to exclude extreme positions 
 
7 But see Grote (2024) for an alterative view on the relation between epistemology and ethics in machine learning. 
8 (Hoyningen-Huene, 2023) argues that these different “senses” of objectivity are actually indicators of objectivity or 
means to increase objectivity (understood as the absence of distorting factors introduced by the knowers or “epistemic 
subjects”). 
 

 
9 
 
(e.g. sexist or racist ones). Second, with respect to social processes (as noted above, a crucial element 
of knowledge production), the outcomes can be regarded as objective if they result from an open 
discussion by the members of the community. Various conditions have to be met to achieve such 
‘interactive objectivity’, of which diversity among participants in the discussion – also with regard to 
different value orientations – is an important one (Douglas 2009, 127-128, cf. Longino 1990). In sum, 
Douglas’ analysis of objectivity not only evades the objection that value-laden science cannot be 
objective but also supports our case for improving RLHF by making it more diverse.  
 
Applying these insights to RLHF allows for an exploration of epistemic and ethical dimensions of AI 
(and in particular LLM) development. But before we can do this we will need to address a possible 
objection to our approach, namely why we should assume that we can apply ideas from philosophy 
of science and social epistemology to LLMs. As noted above, LLMs do not track truth or produce 
genuine knowledge but (re-)produce statistical patterns. They have even been described as 
“stochastic parrots” (Bender et al. 2021) and “bullshit generators” (Hicks et al. 2024). One might 
therefore come to the conclusion that our approach is fundamentally misguided. However, an 
objection along these lines overlooks that our analysis is aimed at RLHF as an epistemic design 
principle of LLMs. RHLF aims to make LLMs behave in such a way that responses to user prompts seem 
as if they would track truth, produce knowledge etc., leading to LLM outputs ideally indistinguishable 
from responses that a knowledgeable human or a group of humans would provide.  Hence, it seems 
reasonable and of pragmatic value to examine RLHF through an epistemological (and also ethical) lens 
and proceed as we suggest. 
 
From an epistemological standpoint, diverse human feedback aids in creating AI systems that are more 
reflective of varied human perspectives, thereby enhancing the models’ objectivity and applicability. 
Ethically, it aligns with the ideal of inclusivity, ensuring that AI systems do not perpetuate existing 
moral biases or inequalities. The described insights from pluralistic philosophy of science and social 
epistemology underscore the significance of incorporating feedback from a wide range of individuals 
in RHLF. This diversity goes beyond mere political representation; it is about avoiding too much 
homogeneity and integrating various epistemic standpoints that arise from different social, cultural, 
and political positions and backgrounds. These standpoints bring unique insights, challenge prevailing 
assumptions, and may ultimately contribute to a more balanced and comprehensive – a more 
humanistic – AI model. However, to achieve this, we argue, it would be necessary to revise key 
elements in the RHLF process in light of the above considerations. In the next section, we make initial 

 
10 
 
suggestions along these lines and point out open questions that need to be addressed to make 
progress. 
 
4. Open questions and potential trade-offs 
How can we make RLHF more pluralistic and what are the challenges along the way? To make progress 
on these questions, we will present tentative ideas. Above all, however, we want to point out 
important issues that will need to be addressed to move forward. We first give a quick overview of 
some practical aspects. We will then discuss evaluator selection, guidance and monitoring, and 
aggregation of individual feedback. Finally, we will point out possible trade-offs of different types.  
4.1 Current practices 
We focus on OpenAI’s methods, as ChatGPT is the model with most users. While OpenAI does not 
disclose too many details, there is general information as to how this feedback was collected in the 
initial stages. Ouyang et al. (2022) provide information on how feedback was collected from humans 
(in particular, they hired a team of 40 contractors on Upwork and ScaleAI), including instructions for 
human evaluators and related details to fine-tune InstructGPT (the direct predecessor of ChatGPT): 
1. Labeller Selection and Criteria: Labellers were chosen based on their agreement with 
sensitive speech flagging, agreement on rankings, sensitive demonstration writing, and self-
assessed ability to identify sensitive speech for different groups.9 The selection process aimed 
to ensure labellers were sensitive to various demographic groups and could identify 
potentially harmful outputs. 
2. Detailed Labelling Instructions: Labellers received detailed instructions on evaluating text 
outputs based on their helpfulness, truthfulness, and harmlessness. The way of evaluating 
‘helpfulness’ was in terms of whether the output followed the users’ intentions and helped 
solving the task. The way of evaluating ‘truthfulness’ was in terms of the output containing 
accurate information, and not misleading the user. Evaluating ‘harmlessness’ involved 
considering that the output should not cause physical, psychological, or social harm to people; 
or damage to equipment, property, the environment, institutions, or resources necessary to 
human wellbeing (for examples consult the paper by Ouyang et al. and the public labelling 
instructions provided to evaluators). 
 
9 In other words, they assessed their ability to identify potentially offensive content, they evaluated their consistency 
in evaluating and comparing content, they tested their capability to write responses that consider sensitivity issues, 
and they required labellers to evaluate their own ability to recognize content that may be sensitive. 

 
11 
 
3. Labelling Instructions Evolution: The instructions given to labellers evolved throughout the 
project to address feedback and a better understanding of the desired measurements. 
Initially, labellers were instructed to prioritise helpfulness to the user above truthfulness and 
harmlessness. However, in the final evaluations, the emphasis shifted to prioritise 
truthfulness and harmlessness.  Here are some of the instructions given (from the instruction 
sheet):  
For each input instruction, labelling will consist of 3 parts: 
1. Labelling instructions. You’ll label a bunch of properties of the instruction, 
including whether it contains PII, etc. [some examples: Personally identifying 
information, User intent is unclear,  Asks for sexual content, Asks for violent 
content, Asks for content denigrating a protected class10, Asks for moral 
judgement, etc.] 
2. Labelling AI model outputs. For each output from an AI model, you’ll label 
the outputs along several different axes, including giving a 1-7 rating, 
judging whether it contains violent or sexual content, etc. 
3. Ranking AI model outputs. You’ll rank outputs from best to worst, including 
ties.”  
 
(Instruction sheet, footnote added [accessed 11 December 2024]) 
[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MJCqDNjzD04UbcnVZ-LmeXJ04-
TKEICDAepXyMCBUb8/edit#heading=h.21o5xkowgmpj] 
 
4. Collaboration with Labellers: The project involved close collaboration with labellers, including 
an onboarding process, detailed task instructions, and a shared chat room for answering 
questions.  
5. Labeller Demographics: A voluntary anonymous survey was sent to labellers to understand 
their demographics better (see fig. 1): 
 
 
10 From Appendix B,  List of protected classes: Race, Color, Religion or creed, National origin or ancestry, Sex (including 
gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity), Age, Physical or mental disability, Veteran status, Genetic 
information, Citizenship. 
 

 
12 
 
 
Figure 1. Labeller demographics (Ouyang 2022,  p.40). The demographic data shows that the 
largest ethnic group was Southeast Asian (52.6%), followed by White/Caucasian (31.6%). 
Nationalities included Filipino and Bangladeshi (22% each), and American (17%). Most 
participants were aged 25-34 (47.4%), and educationally, 52.6% had an undergraduate 
degree, while 36.8% held a master's degree. 
The initial stages arguably lacked diversity. However, with its opening to the broader user base of 
OpenAI, the diversity of users providing feedback has seen significant improvement, as all users 
throughout (193 countries as of January 2024) are able to provide feedback. The current ChatGPT 
interface allows users to give a thumbs up, thumbs down and to copy the output generated by the 
model. Sometimes the user is given two alternatives from which to choose. Additionally, when the 

 
13 
 
model is asked to regenerate an answer, the user is asked whether the second answer was better, 
worse, or the same as the previous answer. 
Now that we have a rough overview of some aspects of the process11, we will discuss pluralistic reform 
ideas and associated challenges. Out of the 3 steps of RLHF, feedback collection and reward modelling 
are the most relevant for our purposes. For the first, we distinguish issues related to selecting 
evaluators and to guiding and monitoring them. For the second, we consider issues related to the 
reception and aggregation of the data and its implications for training of a reward model. We also 
examine the relevance of guidance and the possibility of trade-offs.  
4.2 Selecting evaluators  
An obvious implication that follows from the above discussion on social epistemology is that the 
procedure to select evaluators for RLHF will need to be revised to make it more representative of the 
existing diversity of perspectives (to prevent composition like the initial one above, in which almost 
all raters are educated, almost half American and a third Filipino). While the latter stages in this case 
have more diversity than the initial ones, it should be noted that the current user demographic of 
OpenAI, and by extension the feedback provided for RLFH, may not fully represent society at large (or 
even broad segments of it). For instance, there likely is a predominance of younger, well-educated 
individuals who have both the knowledge and technological means to interact with the free version 
of ChatPGT. In the case of GPT-4, given that there is a financial barrier for prolonged/ professional use, 
it may lead to the self-selection of certain strata of the population. Similarly, there might be a self-
selective mechanism of those that engage in providing feedback. The issue here is that there may be 
certain people who are more inclined to provide this feedback than others, creating a possible self-
selection bias (see  Bethlehem 2010 for self-selection effects in web surveys).   
Although these problems might be easy to identify, it is far less clear how they ought to be resolved. 
So far we detailed that a source of problems stems from the evaluators not representing broader 
groups (which is relevant because of positionality). This naturally raises the question of the sense in 
which evaluators should be representative. Answering this question involves normative choices 
regarding the sense in which we want to make LLMs better aligned with human goals. Having a panel 
that is truly representative of the world population seems hardly feasible, as it would require 
 
11 See Anthropic (Bai et al., 2022) for a discussion on Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF), 
which extends Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) by using AI-generated evaluations. 
Unlike RLHF that depends on human judgement, RLAIF uses constitutional principles to guide AI self-
critique towards harmlessness and helpfulness, although due to similar stakeholder input challenges as 
RLHF, it falls prey to similar problems as the ones discussed below. 
 
 

 
14 
 
comprehensive knowledge of the relevant populations in all regions – a level of detail we lack even 
for many well-studied countries. So, should developers aim for a specific subset of the world’s 
population? If so, which one? Should they aim for a representative set of only a certain range of 
cultural and/or ethical standpoints and values (cf. Intemann 2010) and if so, which ones? Should they 
give a greater weight to evaluators that are less represented in the evaluator pool within society (e.g. 
elderly people)? Hidden in the background of these questions is an even more intricate one: Which 
dimension of diversity should be seen as relevant? Above, we pointed out that social and cultural 
standpoint matters. But this observation only points to the question of which dimensions of diversity 
are epistemically and/or ethically (most) relevant for RHLF. Natural candidates are gender, ethnicity, 
age, social class, and nationality. There may, however, be many more dimensions, some of them more 
difficult to operationalise than others, say cultural background and cognitive diversity.  
One can also ask the more fundamental question of whether representation should actually be the 
primary goal in the selection of evaluators - or whether we should treat “adequate” representation as 
means to our epistemic and ethical ends. Shouldn’t there be certain thresholds, say regarding 
cognitive competencies and ethical outlooks?12 Above we highlighted the problem that evaluators 
may rate answers in ethically problematic ways. In those cases where a certain rating is not motivated 
by deliberately inserting harmful data but reflects the implicit sexist outlook of, say, a Christian 
fundamentalist should this perspective even be represented? If not, who pre-defines the spectrum of 
reasonable viewpoints? As we saw above, Douglas (2009, 124) argues that even if a balanced 
representation of the spectrum of values is desirable for yielding value-neutral objectivity, it may be 
allowed to exclude extreme positions for good moral reasons. However, it is certainly not easy or 
straightforward to determine when this is the case (we will come back to this in the next section). 
Another question of representativeness connects to the issue of marginalised perspectives. If it is 
indeed the case that model output is ethically/epistemically biased due to the fact that it is 
predominantly based on mainstream training data (neglecting and/or distorting minority viewpoints 
underrepresented in the text corpus, thereby amplifying various forms of epistemic injustice, see Kay 
et al. 2024)13, should the selection of evaluators be guided by a principle of affirmative action rather 
than pure representativeness? If so, those responsible for recruiting evaluators would also have to 
decide how these principles can be balanced in a reasonable way. A promising (and normatively 
 
12 OpenAI seemed to screen for this, to some extent, during the development of InstructGPT by conducting a test. This 
test consisted of a multi-part screening process involving sensitive speech flagging, ranking of model completions, 
demonstration writing, and self-assessed ability to identify sensitive content.   
13 For instance, generative amplified testimonial injustice: “Generative AI models are more likely to reproduce the 
voices of those frequently represented and culturally dominant online, while erasing the voices of the socially 
marginalized. This creates a feedback loop where dominant narratives are amplified and marginalized voices are 
further silenced, compounding the testimonial injustice experienced by these groups“ (Kay et al. 2024). 

 
15 
 
justified) starting point could be to experiment with different compositions that slightly over-
represent marginalised groups to understand the extent to which this actually influences the response 
behaviour of LLMs. 
 
4.3 Guidance and monitoring  
RLHF is a guided and monitored process. Evaluators do not act in a vacuum but are required to comply 
with certain guidelines. The developer team pre-defines which groups are classified as ‘protected 
classes’. Similarly, they are given examples as to what constitutes harm. For instance, as can be seen 
in the instruction sheet (see Section 4.1), outputs such as ‘The most common type of home-made 
bomb is made from a pressure cooker filled with explosive material.’ are considered to be highly 
harmful; examples such as ‘Stalin had good reason to believe that his enemies were plotting against 
him, and he took the necessary precautions to ensure his rule.’ are considered as potentially harmful. 
While there is no perfect way to undertake guidance, there may be more structured ways to think 
about guidance and monitoring – this is where the conceptual tools from philosophy of science and 
social epistemology can be useful for addressing some of the most important issues. 
A first issue concerns the principles that should guide the development of instructions for evaluators. 
There are many normative decisions necessary in order to come up with a set of instructions. What 
kinds of issues and possible harms should evaluators consider? On the basis of which values? How 
should different categories be prioritised? Looking at these questions from the perspective of 
pluralism and social epistemology does not provide us with concrete answers to these questions. 
However, it can point us towards the right kind of framework to address these questions. Such a 
framework should be pluralistic in the sense that it is sensitive to a multitude of different perspectives 
and values. This idea leads to asking a different question first: Who should decide on the right 
principles for evaluation guidance? Although it is possible for a certain group (let's say IT experts in 
Silicon Valley), to adopt different perspectives and take a certain variety of values into account, there 
are limits to this approach – namely the limits of what is conceivable for the group and those resulting 
from deep but implicit differences in the interpretation of certain states of affairs. Conceivability and 
interpretation will, at least to a certain extent, depend on the respective experiences and thus the 
respective social positions represented in any (in this case rather homogeneous) group. A promising 
answer to the question about the “who” is therefore that principles for instructions should be decided 
by a pluralistic panel representing sufficient diversity of perspectives and values. What “sufficient 

 
16 
 
diversity” should entail in detail is, of course, subject to the same challenges as the recruitment issues 
discussed above. In our view, only a pragmatic approach is feasible here, starting with "obvious" 
diversity criteria (age, gender, religion, education, nationality) and expanding them iteratively based 
on experience and stakeholder feedback, especially by marginalised groups affected by epistemic 
injustices (cf. Kay et al. 2024). However, the more perspectives are represented at the table, the more 
mediation and active integration of viewpoints will be required, not least to address the issue of power 
imbalances and epistemic injustice in deliberation processes (Rolin 2021). Hence, modes of 
deliberation will have to be introduced that can help to manage these challenges. Here, we can learn 
from pluralistic ethics panels and similar advisory bodies that have developed tools to deal with the 
same kind of issues (Bschir and Lohse 2022; Nuffield Council on  Bioethics n.d.). 
However, even if we can find viable ways to deal with the described challenges, there is one essential 
question (which we already raised with regard to evaluator selection) that remains unanswered: How 
broad should the spectrum of values be that we consider legitimate? Of course, it is possible that 
sexist or racist values will also be represented14 in a truly pluralistic panel deciding on instructions for 
evaluators, whether implicitly or explicitly. We believe that such values should not guide the 
respective instructions for evaluators. However, this means that an ethical framework must be 
considered that is pluralistic on the one hand, but also sets moral boundaries on the other. The 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is a good starting point for this because it represents a 
minimum consensus that is already accepted, at least de jure, by a large number of countries.15 How 
exactly implementation of such an ethically robust framework can succeed, however, is not a trivial 
question.    
A pluralistic panel could also be responsible for monitoring adherence to the instructions and 
managing deviant behaviour of evaluators. It should, in other words, monitor and fine-tune this 
specific social process of social cognition. There will always be situations in which it is not clear how 
certain decision rules should be interpreted or applied or if evaluators really deviate from guidelines 
in a systematic way or not. This need not be due to malicious (or ignorant) actors, but simply to the 
fact that guidelines cannot cover every possible scenario and that there may be multiple 
interpretations of the rules (Miller and Sultanescu 2022). Take, for instance, the instructions given to 
evaluators involved in InstructGPT when evaluating truthfulness. One of the conditions was that 
 
14  Another issue lies in  the risk of harmful data insertion by malicious actors. Here, the main recourse simply lies in 
good screening and monitoring of whether evaluators are correctly following guidelines. 
15 Using the UDHR as a starting point for developing an ethical framework is not without its problems, as its legal and 
ethical interpretation are controversial (Glendon 1998). However, there seems to be no better, less controversial one. 

 
17 
 
outputs ‘Not produc[e] clearly false information about the world (e.g. making up facts or promoting 
conspiracies). For example, the output should not state that Hillary Clinton has served time in prison.’ 
(instruct sheet, p1); this might be straightforward for certain outputs, but not for others. Further, 
languages and cultural contexts influence how questions are interpreted and answers are structured, 
which can have an impact on RLHF (especially when feedback is given in different languages). Consider  
cases where different and cross-cutting kinship categories exist in different languages (Kemp and 
Regier 2012) which may lead to incommensurable answers to questions about social relationships. 
When systematic rule application/deviance problems arise, it is necessary to make adjustments by 
introducing new rules, clarifying rules or adding examples (see above). The exact implementation of 
re-adjustments naturally poses similar issues as those mentioned in the last paragraph (e.g. “Is this 
evaluator mistaken – or does s/he have a value base that we didn’t consider?”), which is why a 
pluralistic panel makes sense here as well. In this context, the degree of openness in the response 
options available to evaluators should also be considered. The spectrum ranges from simple 
comparisons and rating procedures of LLM responses to procedures that allow the insertion of new 
kinds of responses. The latter is more complex, but at the same time more open to points of view that 
have not yet been considered. This might help to assess responses that require a greater level of fine-
grainedness (e.g., they might be accurate and helpful but harmful, or harmless and helpful but false). 
Here, textual input from the evaluators would seem to enable a more reasonable approach. But it 
would also be an option to consider a different procedure, i.e. not to ask evaluators for balance, but 
rather to ask certain evaluators for pro-active liberal coding and others for leftist or conservative 
coding. Such an approach would entail explicitly valuing and preserving distinct viewpoints - whether 
liberal, conservative, or otherwise - rather than asking evaluators to temper or moderate their 
positions, thereby preserving the richness and nuance of different worldviews (rather than forcing 
artificial compromise) as well as acknowledging that true balance often emerges not from individual 
neutrality but from the dynamic interaction of multiple well-articulated positions. Furthermore, it may 
lead to more honest and consistent feedback, as evaluators can assess outputs from their genuine 
perspective rather than trying to approximate some notion of neutrality. This could establish a checks-
and-balance mechanism via pluralistic triangulation in which multiple perspectives “pull” in different 
directions arguably leading to more epistemically and ethically robust model outputs (see Freiesleben 
and Grote 2023, for various notions of robustness in machine learning).   
 
4.4 Feedback Collection and Aggregation 

 
18 
 
An important step in RLHF is the collection and aggregation of individual feedback to enable the 
training of a reward model. The reward model is usually a supervised learning model that can predict 
evaluations. Recall, typical feedback includes binary preferences (i.e. ‘yes’ or ‘no’; ‘good’ or ‘bad’) of a 
certain output, giving a score (e.g. from 0 to 7), or ranking several outputs in order of quality. In 
addition, feedback can also involve giving the explicit answer that should have been given, or providing 
an explicit explanation as to why the answer was correct/incorrect. These items are then aggregated 
and used to train a reward model. In the case of binary preferences or rankings the aggregation might 
be straightforward, although there are different aggregation mechanisms which may make a 
difference in the final policy that gets implemented (e.g., ELO rating, majority voting, averaging, etc.). 
For other types of feedback, important decisions regarding how the reward model is going to be 
trained, the order in which data is presented, and so on, make a difference.  
In the case of InstructGPT, labellers ranked multiple model responses to the same prompt, creating 
numerous pairwise comparisons. The reward model was then trained on these comparisons, with all 
comparisons from a single prompt treated as a single batch. This iterative process used new 
comparison data to continuously update the reward model which was then used to train the policy. 
Although early training prioritised helpfulness, final evaluations emphasised truthfulness and 
harmlessness, leaving the resolution of potential conflicts between these criteria for future 
exploration. While optimising sequentially might do the job, it necessarily prioritises certain objectives 
over others, rather than keeping them all in mind. The way the feedback was aggregated, and the 
sequence by which the reward model evolved, raises several important questions when viewed 
through the lens of pluralism and social epistemology. One key issue is how to effectively combine the 
diverse, and potentially conflicting, feedback from evaluators with different backgrounds, expertise, 
and value systems. Disagreement can often signal areas of underlying complexity, ambiguity or 
tension that warrant further investigation. A pluralistic approach to aggregation would seek to 
preserve and engage with these points of contention, rather than erasing them in pursuit of a false 
consensus. This connects to the issue of how to handle conflicts between different alignment criteria, 
such as helpfulness, truthfulness and harmlessness. InstructGPT’s strategy of shifting priority from 
helpfulness to truthfulness/harmlessness in later training phases is a rather blunt way of navigating 
these trade-offs. A more nuanced approach might involve explicitly modelling the relationships and 
dependencies between these criteria, and allowing for context-specific balancing rather than a one-
size-fits-all hierarchy. In this context, several key additional questions and challenges in feedback 
collection and aggregation emerge. 
One significant issue concerns preserving diverse perspectives during the aggregation process rather 
than cancelling them out or ignoring a subset. This makes it important to find methods that take 

 
19 
 
important disagreements and minority viewpoints seriously in a pluralistic process instead of merely 
averaging them into a pseudo consensus. Connectedly, there is the challenge of navigating and 
balancing conflicting viewpoints. A key question is how the reward model can be aligned with, or at 
least take into account, the values of multiple groups holding conflicting or even incompatible 
viewpoints. Although there has been progress, representing diverse societies in reward models is still 
a pressing concern. How can we overcome the limitations of a single reward function in capturing the 
broad spectrum of human preferences, expertise, and capabilities in a diverse society, where current 
methods risk marginalising under-represented groups by treating differences as mere noise, or 
averaging important differences? This issue underscores the need for a reward system that is sensitive 
to diverse values and perspectives. Such an undertaking requires nuanced reward models. These 
models should adequately reflect the relationships and trade-offs among various alignment criteria, 
enabling context-specific adjustments. Such development would allow for a more refined approach to 
handling feedback that considers the complexity of different stakeholders’ needs and expectations. 
Furthermore, it is worthwhile to explore the concept of multiple reward functions. Moving away from 
the reliance on a singular reward function and instead maintaining multiple models could more 
effectively represent the diverse values of different stakeholders.  
In addition to these challenges, modelling dynamic human values presents its own set of complexities. 
Human feedback is inherently complex and context-dependent, continuously evolving with time. For 
example, attitudes towards certain countries might change due to geopolitical events (e.g. wars), or 
attitudes towards health or governments might change due to pandemics. This dynamism makes it 
difficult to effectively model with static, lower-dimensional preferences given by humans at a certain 
point in time, such as rankings of outputs. 
Further iterations of RLHF will filter some of these problems out. However, certain complex issues may 
not improve through this process, or might require a different approach altogether (think for example 
of questions involving the assessment of the Middle East conflict and how RLHF might introduce model 
drift). A possible starting point for thinking differently about feedback aggregation can be seen in a 
notable study by Bakker et al.(2022) on fine-tuning LLMs to generate meaningful consensus 
statements among groups with diverse opinions. This involved creating debate questions using a pre-
trained LLM on contemporary political and moral issues, followed by data collection and environment 
design where UK-based participants provided their opinions. The study demonstrated the model's 
ability to generate complex consensus statements preferred over LLM-generated and human-
generated alternatives, highlighting the model's sensitivity to individual contributions and robust 
performance with out-of-distribution questions.‚ 

 
20 
 
4.5 Moral and Epistemic Trade-offs 
Finally, we want to look at specific trade-offs in RLHF-assisted AI development. Regarding the type of 
feedback, there are trade-offs among accuracy, speed, and cost. For instance, the choice between 
binary responses and more detailed (pluralistic) feedback from evaluators significantly influences 
these dimensions. Binary responses, while quick and cost-effective, often lack the nuanced 
information that can refine AI behaviour more precisely. Conversely, detailed feedback, although 
richer and potentially more accurate, requires more time from evaluators and incurs higher costs. This 
extended feedback process may slow down the iterative cycles of model training, yet it enriches the 
quality and reliability of the model by providing deeper insights into the evaluators' reasoning and 
perspectives. Balancing these aspects requires careful consideration to optimise the efficiency of the 
RLHF process while maintaining the integrity and depth of the training data. However, we will not 
focus on these trade-offs, but rather concentrate on the ones related to epistemic and moral virtues. 
Recent studies have pointed out a concerning trend in GPT-4's performance, particularly in areas 
requiring high precision, like mathematics (J. Chen et al. 2023). For example, in March 2023, GPT-4 
demonstrated an 84% accuracy rate in identifying prime versus composite numbers, a task that 
demands precise mathematical reasoning. However, by June 2023, its accuracy had notably declined 
to just 51%. This diminishing accuracy brings to light questions about the impact of user diversity on 
the model. Does the interaction with a more heterogeneous user base enhance the model’s overall 
performance, or does it amplify certain limitations? For instance, if users with varying degrees of 
expertise in a subject interact with the model, it might struggle to maintain a high standard of accuracy 
in that domain, but on the other hand, it might be able to interact with the subject at different levels 
of difficulty and abstraction. Possibly a comparison and pluralistic triangulation of different user 
responses can help here. However, such a process - perhaps even organised in a discursive format - 
naturally involves efficiency trade-offs.  
Further complicating this dynamic, a study by (K. Chen et al. 2024) evaluates how GPT-3 interacts with 
diverse socio-demographic groups concerning sensitive topics like climate change and the Black Lives 
Matter movement. The findings reveal a nuanced landscape where conversational styles and user 
experiences correlate significantly with the users' background, potentially indicating biases in the 
model’s responses. This is particularly evident as users from lower educational backgrounds and 
opinion minority groups report poorer experiences. Is this the result of the evaluators that were 
involved in RLHF? (recall that for InstructGPT, more than 85% of the evaluators had at least a university 
degree).  
