1
SF-MMCN: Low-Power Sever Flow Multi-Mode
Diffusion Model Accelerator
Huan-Ke Hsu, I-Chyn Wei
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan
T. Hui Teo
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
tthui@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract—Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become
incredibly popular in recent years, and the significance of
traditional accelerators in dealing with large-scale parameters is
urgent. With the diffusion model’s parallel structure, the hard-
ware design challenge has skyrocketed because of the multiple
layers operating simultaneously. Convolution Neural Network
(CNN) accelerators have been designed and developed rapidly,
especially for high-speed inference. Often, CNN models with
parallel structures are deployed. In these CNN accelerators,
many Processing Elements (PE) are required to perform parallel
computations, mainly the multiply and accumulation (MAC)
operation, resulting in high power consumption and a large
silicon area. In this work, a Server Flow Multi-Mode CNN Unit
(SF-MMCN) is proposed to reduce the number of PE while
improving the operation efficiency of the CNN accelerator. The
pipelining technique is introduced into Server Flow to process
parallel computations. The proposed SF-MMCN is implemented
with TSMC 90-nm CMOS technology. It is evaluated with VGG-
16, ResNet-18, and U-net. The evaluation results show that the
proposed SF-MMCN can reduce the power consumption by 92%,
and the silicon area by 70%, while improving the efficiency
of operation by nearly 81 times. A new FoM, area efficiency
(GOPs/mm2) is also introduced to evaluate the performance of
the accelerator in terms of the ratio throughput (GOPs) and
silicon area (mm2). In this FoM, SF-MMCN improves area
efficiency by 18 times (18.42).
Index Terms—accelerators, area efficiency, Convolution Neural
Network (CNN), diffusion model, parallel structure, low-power
circuit.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the advanced of deep learning, the applications of
Convolution Neural Network (CNN) have sprung up in
recent years. The concept of CNN accelerators has emerged in
a variety of architectures. However, due to the large number of
parameters and the complexity of images skyrocketing with the
development of deep learning, the requirement of low-power,
high speed in CNN accelerator has been significant gradually.
To reduce the scale of features in convolution computation,
some studies [1]–[4], the proposed approximate convolution
circuits, which directly decrease computation resources by
capturing partial data from input feature and weight data, the
complexity of convolution would decrease distinctly. More-
over, because of the small size of the input data, the critical
path of multipliers and the full adders becomes shorter, which
would save the area and power of the computation. And the
timing cost by CNN can accelerate. Since the contents of a
conventional multiplier are full adders, there have been many
assembles of structures of multipliers nowadays, which have
been the same as the approximate multiplier [5]–[8]. In other
words, implementing the approximate multiplier by improving
the basic logic unit of the conventional multiplier becomes
the most intuitive method. There are three main features of
traditional multipliers: 1) partial-product generation, 2) partial-
product accumulation, and 3) final addition. Generally, one of
the serious problems of multipliers is that it takes some time
to accumulate the partial product and the final accumulate be-
cause it is limited by the hardware. Consequently, compressors
[9]–[11] reduce the partial product and the critical path without
any influence on circuit performances.
Although approximate computation units reduce the com-
plexity of convolution, the accuracy lost has become another
serious issue of CNN accelerators. Due to the application of
image recognition, accuracy loss is one of the most fatal fac-
tors of CNN accelerators [12]–[21]. Therefore, researchers try
to focus on the reconfigurable structure of CNN accelerators
instead of modifying the algorithm of MAC computation. The
CNN accelerator that was proposed in [15] can complete the
convolution in different shapes of the kernel. The data flow of
[15] precomputes the sub-output and stores it in memories to
complete the reuse of the data in 3 × 3 convolution. When
performing the 1 × 1 convolution, the architecture in [15]
changed the dimension of the convolution from width to
channel at a time. There are 195 PEs in [15] divided into 65
columns in the top structure, increasing the throughput of the
circuit. However, since the PE array is allocated, the efficiency
will decrease when the size of the input features or the weight
data are not divided by 3 or 65.
Due to the bit-width in software being 64 bits, most studies
adopt the fix-point precision technique to conduct hardware
computation before the occurrence of quantization. However,
the lost data from fix-point data and data truncation between
layers result in accuracy loss. Quantization tries to reduce the
bit-width dramatically, but the accuracy is likely to be less than
the traditional method. Therefore, researchers adapt the quan-
tization function into CNN accelerators. The implementation
of this technique is exemplified in [19], which introduces the
Quantized Network-Acceleration Processor (QNAP) structure.
In this innovative design, weight data, upon undergoing quan-
arXiv:2403.10542v2  [cs.AR]  26 Sep 2024

2
tization, can be seamlessly assembled with other quantified
weight data. Consequently, the PE structure in [19] departs
from conventional designs. With the quantization of weight
data, [19] reduces power consumption.
There are two CNN accelerator architectures between tradi-
tional structure and quantified structure, Figure 1. CNN accel-
erators with quantization technique require a compensation or
quantization unit of hardware implementation, as indicated in
Figure 1 (a). Due to lower bit-width data after quantization, a
smaller area is required of a PE array. On the other hand, the
traditional structure cost a larger hardware area owing to the
elimination of a compensate or quantization unit Figure 1 (b).
             
      
        
                  
               
(a)
             
      
        
(b)
Fig. 1. (a) A CNN accelerator structure with quantization technique. (b) A
Traditional CNN accelerator structure.
Another challenge in CNN accelerators is that due to the
rapid advancement of CNN models, there are lots of CNN
models consisting of parallel structures such as residual and
bottleneck blocks. [15], [19], and [20] implement the CNN
accelerators with the ability to operate parallel CNN models.
However, to address parallel CNN structure, there are two
methods of CNN accelerators in recent studies, parallel, and
series, both strategies result in different drawbacks of hardware
implementations. The parallel method would utilize more
hardware to complete MAC operation due to the large number
of input data compared to the series method. However, the
series strategy takes more time due to dividing residual blocks
into several convolution layers. Therefore, it’s significant to
strike a balance or get rid of both shortcomings of the two
strategies mentioned above.
Furthermore, given the trend of the diffusion model [22]
for generative AI, U-net [23], as one of the most popular
models for the de-noise diffusion model, consists of many
parallel structures. Since generative AIs are responsible for
dealing with enormous data. What’s more, the applications
of generative AI mostly require real-time characteristics such
as translation and use as a personal secretary. Consequently,
accelerating the AI model with a parallel structure has become
the most necessary challenge in recent years.
This paper proposed an enhanced version of [24], [25],
named Sever Flow Multi-Mode Convolution Neural Network
Unit (SF-MMCN). The proposed SF-MMCN achieves high
power efficiency and area efficiency under parallel CNN mod-
els. With an internal pipeline and SF structure, the proposed
SF-MMCN can feast in a variety of environments and over-
come drawbacks resulting from the series and parallel strate-
gies discussed before. By adjusting the mode of hardware, the
proposed structure supports not only the residual block but
also the time parameter process in U-net. The proposed SF-
MMCN contributes to a low power structure, small hardware
area, and high operation efficiency.
II. DEFINITIONS AND BACKGROUND
As mentioned above, this paper proposed a CNN accelerator
based on a Multi-Mode Convolution Neural Network Unit
(MMCN) in [24], Figure 2. MMCN proposed a computation
core that supports convolution, max-pooling, and dense func-
tions. All these functions share the same hardware to increase
the utilization of the circuit. However, there are two serious
issues of MMCN:
• Low efficiency on parallel CNN structure. The MMCN
adopted a series strategy when facing a parallel CNN
structure. Owing to operating each layer in series, MMCN
takes much more time to complete the whole CNN model.
However, more execution time results in more power
consumption, which is against the target of a low-power
CNN accelerator.
• Large memory usage is caused by the large scale of
input data in parallel CNN structure. There isn’t any data
reuse structure or technique in MMCN. As mentioned in
[19], data transmission between core and memories has
the most power of a chip. Therefore, although MMCN
performs low computation power consumption, the total
power of hardware still does not decrease apparently due
to the huge requirement for memories.
  
        
    
                        
             
        
      
          
                
               
                             
          
    
  
  
  
 
    
    
Fig. 2. MMCN structure in [24].
In [19], a dataflow inspired by [26] and [27] was proposed.
This strategy re-arranges parallel structure to series, similar
to the series method introduced before. However, it adds the
pipeline technique between each layer. In a single operation
cycle, [19] can execute each convolution in the pipeline. There-
fore, after conducting a parallel structure, take a residual block
as an example, final outputs can be generated to output buffers.

3
With this technique, [19] speeds up the operation latency
effectively. However, due to the modified series strategy, the
data transmission of data and memories remained high. The
proposed SF structure in this paper reduces the power of data
transmission apparently, which will be introduced in detail in
the next section.
For the diffusion model, the training flow is completed by
adding noise to the original for a great scale of iteration while
prediction is the opposite of training. The noise has to be
removed from the previous feature map input to achieve the
final clear output. This action is called ”de-noise” in the diffu-
sion model. The accelerator has to conduct thousands or even
millions of times to get the output figure. To achieve this goal,
power consumption and latency are the most difficult issues
for traditional accelerators. Therefore, this paper proposed a
structure that is equipped with the ability to conduct de-noise
computation under fast, low-power figures.
Fig. 3. De-noise dataflow of diffusion model [22].
III. SEVER FLOW MULTI-MODE CONVOLUTION NEURAL
NETWORK UNIT
The design and implementation of SF-MMCN will be
discussed in this section.
A. PE design
A PE in SF-MMCN is shown in Figure 4. The most
apparent modification of a PE is the selection between normal
convolution output and convolution output with residual block.
If the SF-MMCN is under the residual mode, the MAC
outputs will enter an adder to finish convolution computing
with residual outputs. The MAC outputs will bypass to output
registers to complete the normal convolution. A PE in SF-
MMCN also equipped pipeline technique by a counter, which
can enhance the throughput of whole structures.
The proposed PE is also equipped with a zero gate unit
which can detect input image data. If input image data is
zero, the zero gate unit will turn off a multiplier and skip
MAC operation to avoid redundant energy consumption. With
a zero gate unit, the proposed PE can reduce additional power
dramatically.
          
           
   
          
                
     
    
      
       
               
            
    
                   
   
 
    
 
 
              
      
              
                   
               
 
              
               
          
Fig. 4. A PE in the proposed-2 structure.
B. Pipeline Technique
As depicted in Figure 4, a pipeline technique is integrated
into each PE within the proposed SF-MMCN structure. Di-
verging from conventional CNN accelerators, including those
in PE arrays like [20], the SF-MMCN structure optimizes chip
area by incorporating the pipeline technique into each PE.
Unlike the traditional approach of passing MAC temporary
outputs sequentially from one PE to the next, the MMCN
structure efficiently bypasses these computation paths through
the utilization of the pipeline technique. To enhance the overall
utilization and configuration of the proposed SF-MMCN struc-
ture, this study strategically employs counters to facilitate the
implementation of the pipeline function.
    
    
    
    
      
      
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
           
           
           
           
      
      
     
     
     
     
                
         
    
    
    
    
    
      
      
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
      
      
     
     
     
     
           
           
           
           
Fig. 5. Sever Flow (SF) structure.

4
    
    
    
    
      
      
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
           
           
           
           
      
      
     
     
     
     
                
         
    
    
    
    
    
      
      
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
      
      
     
     
     
     
           
           
           
           
(a)
 
    
             
      
     
    
    
          
             
             
                        
                        
(b)
                        
                        
                            
 
    
             
      
     
    
    
          
             
             
(c)
Fig. 6. (a) The dataflow of SF while executing. (b) The closer look of SF
structure under normal residual structure. (c) The closer look of SF structure
under residual structure with a convolution layer.
C. Sever Flow
As previously discussed, within the PE array of the SF-
MMCN architecture, one PE is assigned the responsibility
of transmitting data to the other eight PEs, as illustrated in
Figure 5. The data flow during this process is demonstrated
when a PE is passing data. During the computation of a series
CNN model, the PE is typically set into idle mode to minimize
power consumption. However, when confronted with a parallel
CNN structure, SF initiates the corresponding computations,
as depicted in Figure 6 (a) and Figure 6 (b).
The primary challenge in SF-MMCN lies in concurrently
achieving normal convolution and a residual block without
introducing any additional circuitry. Traditional CNN acceler-
ators often compromise either circuit area or latency to execute
parallel convolution. Consequently, the PE array structure in
SF-MMCN deviates from conventional designs, adopting a
server-flow (SF) configuration. As exemplified in Figure 5,
PE 9 serves as a server, delivering the corresponding output
of a residual block from PE 1 to PE 8. This unique configu-
ration enables SF-MMCN to seamlessly integrate both normal
convolution and residual block functionalities without the need
for supplementary circuitry.
During normal convolution operations in SF-MMCN, PE 9
is deactivated. The datapath for this scenario, along with
the corresponding CNN structure, is illustrated in Figure 6
(a). The MAC output, denoted as MAC1 9, swiftly enters
a multiplexer, depicted by the red line in Figure 6 (a), to
seamlessly complete the normal convolution process. While
PE 9 may be considered redundant in this particular function,
its deactivation contributes to the overall efficiency of the
PE array, allowing for high-efficiency multi-mode operation
through selective mode choices.
During the execution of the residual function in SF-MMCN,
without the presence of a residual convolution block, PE 9
becomes active. The hardware and software datapath for this
scenario is depicted in Figure 6 (b) an d (c). In this operation,
designed for residual function without a residual convolution
block, Figure 6 (b), the objective is to accumulate previous
convolution outputs and the MAC outputs from PE 1 to PE 8.
Consequently, PE 9 is specifically tasked with transmitting
the previous convolution output to a multiplexer controlled
by the testbench (Mode select 1). The output from PE 9
then enters an adder situated near the rest of the PEs, where
it accumulates with a MAC output (MAC1 9) to complete
the computation. This configuration streamlines the process,
facilitating the efficient execution of residual functions within
the SF-MMCN architecture.

5
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
        
      
      
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
        
      
      
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
        
    
Fig. 7. The dataflow of the proposed SF on/off.
When SF-MMCN is engaged in the residual function with
a residual convolution block, the output path of PE 9 transi-
tions to its dedicated Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) output, as
illustrated in Figure 6 (c). This output, along with the MAC
outputs from PE 1 to PE 8, is directed to an adder to accom-
plish convolution. In this capacity, PE 9 functions akin to a
server, tasked with preparing the residual convolution output.
Importantly, considering the shape of weights in residual con-
volution, SF can efficiently set up the preparation of residual
convolution output promptly, ensuring synchronization with
the completion of MAC computations by the other eight PEs.
SF-MMCN’s ability to execute parallel CNN structures
without requiring additional computation cycles results in
notable advantages. It not only saves on memory access and
data transfer between SF-MMCN and memory but also en-
ables the simultaneous completion of normal convolution and
residual functions with convolution. This multi-functionality
is achieved while maintaining low power consumption, un-
derscoring the efficiency and versatility of the SF-MMCN
architecture.
D. Operation Flow
Figure 7 shows the waveform of SF-MMCN, PO represents
partial output. Single convolution can be completed in 10
cycles if the width and height of a filter are 3 ∗3. Once
input and weight data enter SF-MMCNs, the MAC operation
executes immediately. After 9 input features and weights finish
loading, the proposed SF-MMCN will take 1 cycle to get
the final convolution outputs. When encountering residual
structure, the proposed SF-MMCN consumes the same cycles
as normal convolution. As mentioned above, PE 1 to PE 8
compute all MAC data of normal convolution, and PE 9
would deliver or compute the previous convolution output
and MAC operation respectively during the same cycles.
Therefore, the proposed SF-MMCN can complete the residual
structure without redundant computation cycles.
The proposed SF-MMCN performs high throughput due to
the SF structure. Owing to four SF-MMCNs in implementation
architecture Figure 18, the shape of output data by PE 1 to
PE 8 is 3 × 3 × 8, which means width × height × channel
and the output shape of PE 9 is 1×1×8, Figure 9. The value
of the channel equals the number of the SF-MMCN in the
implementation. The batch size of the proposed SF-MMCN is
1 because of the high-speed convolution requirement of CNN
accelerators [15]. In other words, due to the batch size being
1, the proposed SF-MMCN can provide decision results in
real-time.
As introduced above, Figure 10 shows the input data
shape of the proposed under different environments. When
encountering a series structure, the shape of the output is
the same as the input shape with zero padding, 3 ∗3 ∗8.
While facing parallel CNN structures, the throughput increases
because PE 9 executes the input feature of the parallel block.
The allocation of an input feature map is indicated in Figure 10
with different colors.
Another problem is that the proposed can address the input
features with a small size. Take 2×2 input map as an instance,
the PE array will separate into two parts to complete two
channels of input data, Figure 11. Therefore, the proposed
SF-MMCN reduces the potential of redundant circuits under
different complexities of the environment.
  
  
  
  
  
        
    
             
        
      
    
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
           
             
             
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
       
       
Fig. 11.
The dataflow of the proposed SF-MMCN on a small size input
feature.
Consequently, Figure 8 demonstrates the datapath of the
proposed SF-MMCN with a normal and small input feature
map under both common CNN structures and residual blocks.
The green and yellow squares are responsible for series and
parallel structure respectively.
As the address of an input feature map of the residual block
is not continued, the address can be generated by shifters. The
corresponding input data pass into the PE 9 directly to finish
MAC computing. According to Figure 8, it’s straightforward
forward in implement eight input data of a residual block that
can be well-distributed to the rest of PEs to complete MAC
operation. Therefore, SF-MMCN doesn’t waste any additional
cycle waiting for MAC output from PE 1 to PE 8.
As described in Figure 11, the control unit separates the
PE array into two parts to complete computations. When
facing residual structure, the PE 9 of the proposed SF-MMCN
can complete two channels of computations before the MAC
outputs are delivered from other PEs due to the same pixel
number of both series block and parallel block.

6
          
     
           
     
              
     
     
     
     
                 
                 
                              
                 
                 
                              
          
          
         
    
      
       
           
     
              
                 
                 
                              
                 
                 
                              
          
          
                       
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
Fig. 8. The illustration of SF-MMCN with different size of input feature map.
 
     
    
             
      
     
    
    
          
             
             
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
                            
               
       
               
             
    
Fig. 9.
Illustration of the input feature and corresponding executed PEs in
the proposed SF-MMCN.
  
  
  
  
  
        
    
             
        
      
    
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
           
             
  
  
  
  
  
        
    
             
        
      
    
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
           
             
     
     
     
     
     
             
             
Fig. 10.
The shape of input features of the proposed SF-MMCN under
different conditions.
                                
      
      
                                
       
          
                                
      
      
                                
         
           
      
          
    
Fig. 12. The dataflow of PE 9 on a normal/small size input feature.
Figure 12 indicated the dataflow of PE 9 under the different
sizes of input. Before the whole system receives the final
answer, PE 9 passes the corresponding MAC data to each
PE under normal input image size conditions. On the other
hand, when the condition changes to a small input image size,
channel N and channel N+1 in Figure 12 is the distribution
separated by the control unit. At the beginning of four cycles,
PE 9 is responsible for the computations of channel N, the
rest of the four cycles are the computations of the MAC
data of channel N+1. Therefore, due to the hardware and
timing distribution of the proposed SF-MMCN, there aren’t
any occurrences of redundant circuits and cycles.

7
E. Diffusion model
Fig. 13. The U-net structure.
Figure 13 shows the U-net which is implemented in this
paper. There are lots of blocks in the model. Each block
consists of two convolution layers and one dense layer which is
responsible for the computation of time parameters. Moreover,
the hardware of each block is the same, which means that the
proposed SF-MMCN can support multiple computations in the
same operation cycle. The dataflow of a block of U-net is
indicated in Figure 14. There are 4 groups of a single block,
which distributes the U-net block into a dense layer (Block
1), a convolution layer with an activation function (Block 2),
a convolution layer without an activation function (Block 3),
and final logic computation (Block 4).
Fig. 14. The block distribution of U-net.
According to the block distribution, the dataflow with timing
is described by Figure 15 and Figure 16. When the computa-
tion starts (T0 in Figure 15), Figure 16 PE 1 to PE 8 (orange)
are responsible for the convolution with activation function
(ReLu). Meanwhile, PE 9 conducts a time parameter dense
layer. From T1 to T2 in Figure 15, PE 1
PE 8 operates the
other convolution layer and combines the final result through
final logic computation.
Fig. 15. The operation timing distribution of the proposed SF-MMCN.
Fig. 16. The allocation of the proposed structure among different blocks.
By introducing the implementations of the proposed SF-
MMCN, the key to the proposed SF is PE 9. Since the rest
of the PEs are recommended to fulfill the main connection
of models, PE 9 is assisted to deal with the parallel structure
such as residual and time parameter operator. This architecture
seems not quite complex but can complete difficult, deep
learning models. Therefore, the proposed structure is equipped
with great configurable features.
F. Data Reuse
Leveraging the SF structure, the proposed SF-MMCN op-
timizes data reuse due to the prevalence of repeated input
images, Figure 17 (a). Between each convolution cycle, there
exist 8 repeated input data, corresponding to 8 registers from
PE 1 to PE 8. To accommodate the 16-bit requirements for
residual blocks in hardware, SF-MMCN expands the bit-width
of these 8 registers to 32 bits, facilitating simultaneous storage
of residual and reused data, Figure 17 (b). This strategic ap-
proach reduces power consumption by avoiding the reloading
of repeated data in every computation cycle. As a result,
SF-MMCN significantly conserves energy, demonstrating the
efficacy of its SF structure.
G. Implementation Architecture
The implementation of the proposed SF-MMCN is indicated
in Figure 18. The input image features and weight data are
stored in off-chip memory before executing. After input and
weight data enter the computation core through I/O interface,
dataflow would be managed by TOP CTRL through weight
and input buffer.
There are four SF-MMCNs in the implementation of the
proposed SF-MMCN. Owing to data reuse in implementa-
tion and large MAC in a dense layer, each SF-MMCN can

8
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
           
                               
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
           
(a)
              
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
         
    
 
    
      
     
           
             
          
                 
          
                          
    
(b)
Fig. 17.
(a) Illustration of repeated data in the proposed SF-MMCN. (b)
Data-reused structure.
exchange data by registers of each PE in SF-MMCN. If
the output channel exceeds hardware limitation, the dataflow
of computation will iterate to complete convolutions. What’s
more, with a pooling unit and activation function unit in the
proposed SF-MMCN, it also supports different functions of
CNN as MMCN in [24]. All control signals are switched by
TOP CTRL through the testbench.
H. Operation Efficiency of Residual Blocks
In traditional CNN accelerators, when facing a parallel CNN
structure, most of the strategy is modifying the dataflow from
parallel to series [19], [24], as shown in Figure 19 (a). In
this study, the proposed SF-MMCN combines a normal con-
volution layer and a convolution layer hidden in the residual
block. The Residual 0 in figure 19 (a) doesn’t have to wait
for series structure (Conv 0 and Conv 1 in Figure 19 (a))
finishing computing. In other words, according to Figure 19
(b), traditional CNN accelerators spend additional cycles to
complete convolution layers with parallel structures. There-
fore, the proposed SF-MMCN performs the higher efficiency
while conducting parallel structures.
I. Hardware Utilization and Power Efficiency
This paper aims to increases the utilization of PEs in PE
array in a CNN accelerator. Due to the pipeline technique in
a PE in the proposed SF-MMCN, a single PE can complete
a convolution computation by itself. The utilization of PE in
hardware is indicated in:
Ct = T
t × 100%
(1)
UP E = PEact
PEtotal
× Ct × 100%
(2)
In equation (1), Where Ct is the percentage of computing
cycles, which means actual operating cycles T divided by
total enable cycles t. PEact and PEtotal represent actual
executing PEs and total PEs in hardware respectively. UP E
is the utilization of PEs in hardware. Although most CNN
accelerators perform high PE utilization, the occurrence of
redundant PE still happens when encountering an unsuitable
CNN model. The utilization of PE is relatively connected with
power consumption. As the biggest structure in a CNN accel-
erator, the PE array consumes the most power in operation.
The equation (3) indicates the total power Ptotal of a CNN
accelerator.
Ptotal = (N × P1) + PR + PC
(3)
N is equal to PEact in equation (2), which means the
number of actual executing PEs in hardware. P1 represents
the power consumption of a single PE, PR, and PC are
the power of redundant circuit and control unit respectively.
However, given the diversity of conditions in different CNN
models, such as the parallel block mentioned before. What’s
more, with the development of CC accelerators, many more
studies perform high efficiency in implementation. Ptotal only
expresses the estimation of total power. Therefore, another
concept of efficiency factor (ν) is explained in equation (4).
Efficiency Factor(ν) = Ptotal
UP E
(4)
The efficiency factor equals the utilization of PE divided by
total power consumption. According to equation (4), it reveals
that if the value of ν increases, it means the corresponding
structure spends much more power on redundant hardware.
This is because the value of PE utilization never equals zero
except the circuit is idle. Consequently, the smaller ν shows
that the power consumption mostly results from the PE array.
Likewise, higher PE utilization represents the well-allocated
hardware, which indicates more PEs are conducting MAC
operations. In other words, to reduce the power consumption
of a CNN accelerator, it’s necessary to reduce the scale of the
PE array, which meets the target of this paper.
Moreover, function (4) can also be computed under single
convolution layers. This paper emphasizes the operation con-
ditions of series and parallel CNN models, function (4) also
provides ν under different environments by adjusting the value
of N and PR in equation (4).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The proposed SF-MMCN is implemented in Verilog HDL
and logic synthesis with Design Compiler by Synopsys and
implemented in TSMC 40nm technology under 400MHz clock
frequency with Innovus by Candense. The bit-width of weight,
input images data, and bias data are set to 16 bits fixed
point. The proposed SF-MMCN can execute on VGG-16 and
ResNet-18 in this paper. Figure 18 is the implemented archi-
tecture of the proposed SF-MMCN. According to Figure 18
there are 8 SF-MMCNs in implemented architecture.

9
  
  
  
  
  
        
    
             
        
      
    
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
                
          
                
               
                             
          
                                
               
             
            
    
    
       
       
       
       
             
                              
           
             
       
       
       
       
Fig. 18. The architecture of SF-MMCN.
      
      
          
     
      
      
      
          
     
      
             
         
       
(a)
     
          
      
    
     
    
     
    
      
     
     
          
      
    
     
    
      
     
          
          
          
             
         
       
(b)
Fig. 19. Dataflow comparison between traditional structures and the proposed
SF-MMCN on (a) waveform. (b) CNN structure illustration.
A. Selection of number of SF-MMCN
Fig. 20. The number of SF-MMCN and corresponding Efficiency Factor ν.
As mentioned above, there are 8 proposed SF-MMCN in
implemented structure. The reason why adopting 8 SF-MMCN
is owing to the performance indicated in Figure 20. According
to Figure 20, since the efficiency factor is the ratio between
power and the actual executed PE in implementation, 8 SF-
MMCNs perform great ν values. Although 16 SF-MMCNs
provide the best ν value, the power consumption and the
number of PEs become as large as the target of this paper.
In other words, 16 SF-MMCNs shows the best result of ν,
but perform worse efficiency (GOPs/W). On the other hand, 2
and 4 SF-MMCNs provide the unwilling value of ν because a
small MAC core unbalances the distribution of each hierarchy.

10
TABLE I
COMPARISON WITH OTHER ACCELERATORS
Performance
TCASI’21 [15]
TCASI’21 [28]
TCASI’22 [29]
ISSCC’21 [19]
ISSCC’23 [30]
MMCN [24]
This work
Frequency (MHz)
200
250
700
100-470
20-400
200
400
Technology
65nm
55nm
28nm
28nm
28nm
90nm
40nm
Area (mm2)
6.2
2.75
NA
1.9
7.29
0.36(core)
1.9
Gate count (NAND2)
938k
NA
1.12M
NA
NA
NA
211k
Precision (Bits)
16
16
16
8
1-8
16
16
Number of PEs
196
168
288
144
8
32
72
CNN models
VGG-16
ResNet-50
VGG-16
AlexNet
VGG-16
AlexNet/VGGNet
GoogleNet/ResNet
Eff.N-L0
ViT-T/M.Mxr-B
VGG-16
VGG-16
ResNet-18
Power (mW)
247
114.6
186.6
19.4 - 131.6
2.06-231.7
3.58(core)
18
Throughput (GOPs)
77.4/75.4
84.0
403
NA
1870-18900
2572.184
437.9
Energy Effi. (GOPs/W)
0.31k/0.3k
NA
2.1k
12.1k
907k-551k
718k
24.3k
Area Effi. (Gops/mm2)
12.48
30.55
NA
745.1
720-2600
NA
230.47
Effi. actor (ν)
82.3
-
0.64
-
-
0.11
0.02
B. Results and Analysis
(a)
(b)
Fig. 21. The PE utilization of the proposed SF-MMCN on (a) VGG-16. (b)
ResNet-18.
1) PE utilization: The target of this paper is to reduce the
scale of the PE array and increase the utilization of PEs in
hardware implementation. Figure 21 (a) and Figure 21 (b) are
the performance of PE utilization on VGG-16 and ResNet-18
respectively. In the first layer of VGG-16, the PE utilization is
lower than any other layer owing to the input image channel
being 3. Therefore, only 6 of the proposed SF-MMCN are set
to execute the convolution. In the rest layer of the VGG-16, the
PE utilization is about 89% because of the series structure in
VGG-16. The PE 9 in each of the proposed SF-MMCNs only
processes the data reuse function instead of MAC operations.
On ResNet-18, Figure 21 (b), the reason for PE utilization
of the first layer is lower than the rest of the layers is the same
as VGG-16. The series structure in ResNet-18 is also about
89%. The highlight of ResNet-18 is residual structures. Due
to the MAC operations and data transmission of the residual
block, the PE utilization is up to 100%. The definition of PE
utilization in this paper is that all sub-circuits in PE are fully
operated MAC computations in a single cycle of convolution.
Therefore, although PE utilization in the first of VGG-16 and
ResNet-18 are the lowest in whole CNN models, the density
of MAC operation are much higher than CARLA [15], which
only executes 3 PEs per cycle.
TABLE II
OPERATION EFFICIENCY COMPARISON
Pixel
Cycles/CONV
No. of MAC
Speedup
[15]
SF-MMCN
[15]
SF-MMCN
(Normalization)
28
84
9
28
75
×2.67
32
96
9
32
85
×2.67
224
672
9
224
597
×2.67
2) Operation Efficiency: The PEs in every proposed SF-
MMCN are executing MAC operations in parallel. Therefore,
all PEs deliver convolution outputs at the same time after
9 cycles, which means an SF-MMCN can finish 8 convolu-
tion outputs in 9 cycles. Table II is the operation efficiency
comparison between CARLA [15] and the proposed SF-
MMCN. CARLA operates convolutions by each row of filters.
Therefore, if the pixel of the input feature and the filter size
are 28 and 3 × 3 respectively, CARLA has to spend around
3 times of pixel cycles to finish a convolution computation.
Meanwhile, the MAC operations of the proposed SF-MMCN
is about ×2.67 than CARLA due to the density of MAC

11
operation in SF-MMCN is almost 100% in single convolution
computation.
Fig. 22. The MAC operation performance of the proposed SF-MMCN.
To analyze the operation efficiency of the proposed SF-
MMCN, Figure 22 and Figure 23 indicate the performance of
the proposed structure under same and different pixels of input
feature map and weight data. When computing under the same
size of weight data, it’s apparent that the number of cycles
to deliver the first MAC output of the proposed SF-MMCN
maintains only 9 despite the increasing of input data Figure 22.
On the other hand, CARLA [15] requires additional cycles
due to a modified low-power structure. The smallest cycle for
CARLA has always been 3 times N according to Figure 22.
Once the size of input data exceeds 32, CARLA [15] consumes
many more cycles finishing convolution.
However, the size of weights is not always the same owing
to the more complex CNN models coming out. Therefore,
the analysis of the corresponding circumstance is revealed in
Figure 23. Where Wh and Ww represent the height and width
of weight data respectively. The result shows that though the
proposed structure requires to complete whole weight pixel in
one convolution operation, the self-computing characteristic of
single PE makes SF-MMCN deliver 9 convolution outputs in
these cycles. However, CARLA [15] only provides one convo-
lution output in the same cycle on account of computing input
image per row. Consequently, combined with Table II and
Figure 23, the result shows that the proposed SF-MMCN can
keep in high operation efficiency under different environments.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
3x3
28x28
32x32
226x226
Operation cycles
Input pixel (NxN)
The performance of MAC of SF-MMCN 
CARLA
SF-MMCN
Fig. 23. The efficiency performance of the proposed SF-MMCN.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
3x3
4x4
5x5
6x6
7x7
8x8
Operation cycles
Weight size (WhxWw)
Efficiency of SF-MMCN 
CARLA
SF-MMCN
Fig. 24.
Latency comparison between MMCN [24] and the proposed-SF-
MMCN.
The highlight of the implementation of the proposed SF-
MMCN on diffusion model is the throughput performance.
Since the complexity of a single block in U-net is much
more than a single convolution layer in VGG or ResNet.
Therefore, the best case of throughput is Block 2 and Block
3 according to Figure 14 and Table 25. These are two of the
most massive layers in a block in U-net. Since Block 1 and
Block 4 are only for single channels or simple computation,
which result in light percentages of operation cycles in one
block in U-net. Therefore, if considering 4 blocks together
to observe the throughput of a single block, it will achieve
up to 437.976 GOPs. This result indicates that SF-MMCN
successfully supports the diffusion model with high efficiency.
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Throughput (GOPs)
8.76
214.6
214.6
0.05
Cycles
0.02
0.49
0.49
0.0001
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
50
100
150
200
250
Cycles  (Normalization)
Throughput (GOPs)
Distribution of throughput
Throughput (GOPs)
Cycles
Fig. 25. The throughput performance of the proposed SF-MMCN on U-net.
C. Comparison with Other Accelerators
The comparison of the proposed SF-MMCN and other
remarkable accelerators is indicated in Table I. Although the
proposed SF-MMCN only implemented VGG-16 and ResNet-
18, it also supports other CNN models due to SF structure.
This paper selects these models as examples of series and
parallel models. The power and area performances are from
synthesis results. First of all, as one of the targets of this study,
the proposed SF-MMCN only required 72 PEs. The reason
why [30] only adopted 8 PEs is that the specific structure of

12
PEs in [30]. The PE in [30] not only consists of multipliers
and accumulators but also data management circuits. What’s
more, though [24] uses 32 PE in implementation, the latency
of MMCN [24] on CNN models with parallel structure is not
as well as the proposed SF-MMCN, Figure 24. Due to the
quantified MAC operations in the QNAP structure, the PE
structure is different from traditional PE structures. Therefore,
although the PE utilization in QNAP [19] is almost 100%,
the density of hardware executing reports lower hardware
utilization.
The throughput of each accelerator in Table I is the peak
throughput. Though MMCN [24] is the highest among all
accelerators because of the different definitions of throughput.
The throughput OPs in this paper are almost equal to FLOPs.
Therefore, the proposed SF-MMCN performs a throughput
of around 437.9 GOPs. Due to a large number of parame-
ters and multiple layers in U-net, the proposed SF-MMCN
achieves throughput incredibly compared to the old version
MMCN [24].
With high throughput performances of the proposed de-
sign, the other representative FoMs are operation efficiency
GOPs/W and area efficiency GOPs/mm2. The former
indicates the performance of the throughput of every power
consumption unit of the accelerator, the latter is introduced in
terms of the ratio of the throughput and area. According to
Table I, all the information of the other state-of-the-art CNN
accelerators is the result shown in corresponding references.
Consequently, the operation efficiency of the proposed design
is up to 81 times compared to CARLA [15]. In area efficiency,
the proposed structure advances nearly by 18 times (18.42).
The other factor of performance in this paper is ν. As
the index of operating density of hardware, the proposed
SF-MMCN provides the smallest value of ν among other
accelerators. Owing the specific PE structures in [28], [19]
and [30], it’s hard to receive the clear value of PE utilization
(U PE in equation (2)). Therefore, the ν in Table I are ”-
”. According to Table I, CARLA [15] reports the highest ν
value is because only 3 PEs operates in cycles. The Pact only
3 when the size of the filter is 3 × 3. Consequently, the value
of ν on the proposed SF-MMCN is the smallest representing
that the proposed SF-MMCN can operate Neural Network
computation without any redundant hardware, which reduces
the power significantly.
Fig. 26. The layout of the proposed SF-MMCN chip.
D. Final Implementation
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED SF-MMCN CHIP
Performance
Specifications
Technology
TSMC 40 nm
Frequency
200 MHz
Voltage
0.9 V
Bit-width
16 bits
Chip size
0.63mm × 0.63mm
Chip area (Core)
0.39 mm2
Total Power
116.7 mW
Efficiency
3.75 GOPs/mW
Area Effi.
3752.36 GOPs/mm2
The layout depicted in Figure 26 represents the proposed
SF-MMCN chip design. Upon completing the placement and
routing processes, the final performance metrics of the chip
are summarized in Table III. Notably, the proposed SF-
MMCN chip exhibits remarkable efficiency, reaching up to
3.75 GOPs/mW while occupying a mere 0.17 mm2 of
hardware area. The throughput achieved is attributed to the
operation of eight SF-MMCN cores. Scaling up the im-
plementation by incorporating additional SF-MMCN cores
promises a significant boost in throughput, facilitated by self-
convolution by a processing element (PE). Furthermore, the
compact hardware footprint suggests the potential for scala-
bility without incurring substantial increases in hardware and
power consumption. In conclusion, the proposed SF-MMCN
chip successfully meets the objectives outlined in the thesis.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper provides the structure of SF-MMCN, a CNN
accelerator with SF structure which lets SF-MMCN perform

13
high throughput and acceleration of not only series but also
parallel CNN structure. SF structure in the proposed SF-
MMCN can operate convolution and conduct data reuse. SF-
MMCN performs 18 mW of power consumption with only
1.9 mm2 hardware area. The number of PE in SF-MMCN
implementation is only 72, which is lower than other accel-
erators with traditional PE structures. The concept of efficient
factor ν is also proposed in this paper, which represents
the utilization density of PEs in an accelerator. Finally, SF-
MMCN achieves energy efficiency 24.3 k(GOPs/W) and
230.47(GOPS/mm2) of area efficiency.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank SUTD-ZJU IDEA Visiting Professor
Grant (SUTD-ZJU (VP) 202103, and SUTD-ZJU Thematic
Research Grant (SUTD-ZJU (TR) 202204), for supporting this
work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Ramasamy, G. Narmadha, and S. Deivasigamani, “Carry based
approximate full adder for low power approximate computing,” in 2019
7th International Conference on Smart Computing & Communications
(ICSCC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[2] H. R. Mahdiani, A. Ahmadi, S. M. Fakhraie, and C. Lucas, “Bio-inspired
imprecise computational blocks for efficient vlsi implementation of soft-
computing applications,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I:
Regular Papers, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 850–862, 2009.
[3] A. Dalloo, A. Najafi, and A. Garcia-Ortiz, “Systematic design of an
approximate adder: The optimized lower part constant-or adder,” IEEE
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26,
no. 8, pp. 1595–1599, 2018.
[4] S. Raghuram and N. Shashank, “Approximate adders for deep neural
network accelerators,” in 2022 35th International Conference on VLSI
Design and 2022 21st International Conference on Embedded Systems
(VLSID).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 210–215.
[5] P. U. Joshi, D. Khushlani, and R. Khobragade, “Power-area efficient
computing technique for approximate multiplier with carry prediction,”
in 2023 11th International Conference on Emerging Trends in Engineer-
ing & Technology-Signal and Information Processing (ICETET-SIP).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–4.
[6] S. Hashemi, R. I. Bahar, and S. Reda, “Drum: A dynamic range
unbiased multiplier for approximate applications,” in 2015 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD).
IEEE,
2015, pp. 418–425.
[7] I. Hammad, L. Li, K. El-Sankary, and W. M. Snelgrove, “Cnn inference
using a preprocessing precision controller and approximate multipliers
with various precisions,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 7220–7232, 2021.
[8] W. Liu, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “A precision-scalable energy-efficient con-
volutional neural network accelerator,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 3484–3497, 2020.
[9] J. Tonfat and R. Reis, “Low power 3–2 and 4–2 adder compressors im-
plemented using astran,” in 2012 IEEE 3rd Latin American Symposium
on Circuits and Systems (LASCAS).
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–4.
[10] L. Sayadi, S. Timarchi, and A. Sheikh-Akbari, “Two efficient ap-
proximate unsigned multipliers by developing new configuration for
approximate 4: 2 compressors,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 1649–1659, 2023.
[11] A. G. Strollo, D. De Caro, E. Napoli, N. Petra, and G. Di Meo,
“Low-power approximate multiplier with error recovery using a new
approximate 4-2 compressor,” in 2020 IEEE International Symposium
on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–4.
[12] Y.-H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, and V. Sze, “Eyeriss: An energy-
efficient reconfigurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural net-
works,” IEEE journal of solid-state circuits, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 127–138,
2016.
[13] A. Ansari, K. Gunnam, and T. Ogunfunmi, “An efficient reconfigurable
hardware accelerator for convolutional neural networks,” in 2017 51st
Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers. IEEE, 2017,
pp. 1337–1341.
[14] C. Yang, H. Zhang, X. Wang, and L. Geng, “An energy-efficient and
flexible accelerator based on reconfigurable computing for multiple
deep convolutional neural networks,” in 2018 14th IEEE International
Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology (ICSICT).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–3.
[15] M. Ahmadi, S. Vakili, and J. P. Langlois, “Carla: A convolution
accelerator with a reconfigurable and low-energy architecture,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 68, no. 8,
pp. 3184–3196, 2021.
[16] W. Xu, Z. Zhang, X. You, and C. Zhang, “Reconfigurable and low-
complexity accelerator for convolutional and generative networks over
finite fields,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Inte-
grated Circuits and Systems, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 4894–4907, 2020.
[17] W. Liu, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “A precision-scalable energy-efficient con-
volutional neural network accelerator,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 3484–3497, 2020.
[18] J. Lu, D. Liu, A. Hu, C. Zhang, C. Mo, R. Guo, and H. Li, “A low-
cost and configurable hardware architecture of sparse 1-d cnn for ecg
classification,” in 2022 IEEE 16th International Conference on Solid-
State & Integrated Circuit Technology (ICSICT).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–3.
[19] H. Mo, W. Zhu, W. Hu, G. Wang, Q. Li, A. Li, S. Yin, S. Wei,
and L. Liu, “9.2 a 28nm 12.1 tops/w dual-mode cnn processor using
effective-weight-based convolution and error-compensation-based pre-
diction,” in 2021 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference
(ISSCC), vol. 64.
IEEE, 2021, pp. 146–148.
[20] Y. Zeng, H. Sun, J. Katto, and Y. Fan, “Accelerating convolutional neural
network inference based on a reconfigurable sliced systolic array,” in
2021 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[21] W. Xu, Z. Zhang, X. You, and C. Zhang, “Reconfigurable and low-
complexity accelerator for convolutional and generative networks over
finite fields,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Inte-
grated Circuits and Systems, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 4894–4907, 2020.
[22] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 6840–
6851, 2020.
[23] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in Medical image computing and
computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th international con-
ference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III 18.
Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[24] H.-K. Hsu, I.-C. Wey, and T. H. Teo, “A energy-efficient re-configurable
multi-mode convolution neuron network accelerator,” in 2023 IEEE 16th
International Symposium on Embedded Multicore/Many-core Systems-
on-Chip (MCSoC).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 45–50.
[25] ——, “Sf-mmcn: A low power re-configurable server flow convolution
neural network accelerator,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2403.10542
[26] M. Alwani, H. Chen, M. Ferdman, and P. Milder, “Fused-layer cnn
accelerators,” in 2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–12.
[27] H. Mo, L. Liu, W. Zhu, Q. Li, H. Liu, S. Yin, and S. Wei, “A multi-
task hardwired accelerator for face detection and alignment,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 30,
no. 11, pp. 4284–4298, 2019.
[28] B. Huang, Y. Huan, H. Chu, J. Xu, L. Liu, L. Zheng, and Z. Zou, “Ieca:
An in-execution configuration cnn accelerator with 30.55 gops/mm2
area efficiency,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular
Papers, vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 4672–4685, 2021.
[29] Z. Shao, X. Chen, L. Du, L. Chen, Y. Du, W. Zhuang, H. Wei, C. Xie,
and Z. Wang, “Memory-efficient cnn accelerator based on interlayer
feature map compression,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
I: Regular Papers, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 668–681, 2021.
[30] S. Moon, H.-G. Mun, H. Son, and J.-Y. Sim, “A 127.8 tops/w arbitrarily
quantized 1-to-8b scalable-precision accelerator for general-purpose
deep learning with reduction of storage, logic and latency waste,” in 2023
IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC).
IEEE,
2023, pp. 21–23.
