Text2Video-Zero:
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models are Zero-Shot Video Generators
Levon Khachatryan1∗
Andranik Movsisyan1∗Vahram Tadevosyan1∗
Roberto Henschel1∗
Zhangyang Wang1,2 Shant Navasardyan1
Humphrey Shi1,3,4
1Picsart AI Resarch (PAIR)
2UT Austin
3U of Oregon
4UIUC
https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/Text2Video-Zero
Text-to-Video generation: "a horse galloping on a street"
Text-to-Video generation: "a panda is playing guitar on times square"
Text-to-Video generation + pose control: "a bear
dancing on the concrete"
Video Instruct-Pix2Pix: "make it Van Gogh Starry Night style"
Text-to-Video generation + edge control: "white butterfly"
Figure 1: Our method Text2Video-Zero enables zero-shot video generation using (i) a textual prompt (see rows 1, 2), (ii)
a prompt combined with guidance from poses or edges (see lower right), and (iii) Video Instruct-Pix2Pix, i.e., instruction-
guided video editing (see lower left). Results are temporally consistent and follow closely the guidance and textual prompts.
Abstract
Recent text-to-video generation approaches rely on com-
putationally heavy training and require large-scale video
datasets. In this paper, we introduce a new task of zero-
shot text-to-video generation and propose a low-cost ap-
proach (without any training or optimization) by leverag-
ing the power of existing text-to-image synthesis methods
(e.g. Stable Diffusion), making them suitable for the video
domain. Our key modiﬁcations include (i) enriching the la-
*Equal contribution.
tent codes of the generated frames with motion dynamics
to keep the global scene and the background time consis-
tent; and (ii) reprogramming frame-level self-attention us-
ing a new cross-frame attention of each frame on the ﬁrst
frame, to preserve the context, appearance, and identity of
the foreground object. Experiments show that this leads to
low overhead, yet high-quality and remarkably consistent
video generation. Moreover, our approach is not limited to
text-to-video synthesis but is also applicable to other tasks
such as conditional and content-specialized video gener-
ation, and Video Instruct-Pix2Pix, i.e., instruction-guided
arXiv:2303.13439v1  [cs.CV]  23 Mar 2023

video editing. As experiments show, our method performs
comparably or sometimes better than recent approaches,
despite not being trained on additional video data. Our
code will be open sourced at: https://github.com/Picsart-
AI-Research/Text2Video-Zero.
1. Introduction
In recent years, generative AI has attracted enormous at-
tention in the computer vision community. With the advent
of diffusion models [33, 12, 34, 35], it has become tremen-
dously popular and successful to generate high-quality im-
ages from textual prompts, also called text-to-image synthe-
sis [25, 28, 31, 7, 43]. Recent works [14, 32, 11, 41, 5, 20]
attempt to extend the success to text-to-video generation
and editing tasks, by reusing text-to-image diffusion models
in the video domain. While such approaches yield promis-
ing outcomes, most of them require substantial training with
a massive amount of labeled data which can be costly and
unaffordable for many users. With the aim of making video
generation cheaper, Tune-A-Video [41] introduces a mech-
anism that can adopt Stable Diffusion (SD) model [28] for
the video domain. The training effort is drastically reduced
to tuning one video. While that is much more efﬁcient than
previous approaches, it still requires an optimization pro-
cess. In addition, the generation abilities of Tune-A-Video
are limited to text-guided video editing applications; video
synthesis from scratch, however, remains out of its reach.
In this paper, we take one step forward in studying the
novel problem of zero-shot, “training-free” text-to-video
synthesis, which is the task of generating videos from tex-
tual prompts without requiring any optimization or ﬁne-
tuning.
A key concept of our approach is to modify a
pre-trained text-to-image model (e.g., Stable Diffusion), en-
riching it with temporally consistent generation. By build-
ing upon already trained text-to-image models, our method
takes advantage of their excellent image generation qual-
ity and enhances their applicability to the video domain
without performing additional training. To enforce tempo-
ral consistency, we present two innovative and lightweight
modiﬁcations: (1) we ﬁrst enrich the latent codes of gen-
erated frames with motion information to keep the global
scene and the background time consistent; (2) we then use
cross-frame attention of each frame on the ﬁrst frame to
preserve the context, appearance, and identity of the fore-
ground object throughout the entire sequence. Our exper-
iments show that these simple modiﬁcations lead to high-
quality and time-consistent video generations (see Fig. 1
and further results in the appendix). Despite the fact that
other works train on large-scale video data, our method
achieves similar or sometimes even better performance (see
Figures 8, 9 and appendix Figures 12, 23, 24). Further-
more, our method is not limited to text-to-video synthe-
sis but is also applicable to conditional (see Figures 6, 5
and appendix Figures 17, 19, 20, 21) and specialized video
generation (see Fig. 7), and instruction-guided video edit-
ing, which we refer as Video Instruct-Pix2Pix motivated by
Instruct-Pix2Pix [2] (see Fig. 9 and appendix Figures 22,
23, 24).
Our contributions are summarized as three-folds:
• A new problem setting of zero-shot text-to-video syn-
thesis, aiming at making text-guided video generation
and editing “freely affordable”. We use only a pre-
trained text-to-image diffusion model without any fur-
ther ﬁne-tuning or optimization.
• Two novel post-hoc techniques to enforce temporally
consistent generation, via encoding motion dynamics
in the latent codes, and reprogramming each frame’s
self-attention using a new cross-frame attention.
• A broad variety of applications that demonstrate our
method’s effectiveness, including conditional and spe-
cialized video generation, and Video Instruct-Pix2Pix
i.e., video editing by textual instructions.
2. Related Work
2.1. Text-to-Image Generation
Early approaches to text-to-image synthesis relied on
methods such as template-based generation [18] and fea-
ture matching [27]. However, these methods were limited
in their ability to generate realistic and diverse images.
Following the success of GANs [8], several other deep
learning-based methods were proposed for text-to-image
synthesis. These include StackGAN [45], AttnGAN [42],
and MirrorGAN [23], which further improve image quality
and diversity by introducing novel architectures and atten-
tion mechanisms.
Later, with the advancement of transformers [37], new
approaches emerged for text-to-image synthesis. Being a
12-billion-parameter transformer model, Dall-E [26] intro-
duces two-stage training process: First, it generates image
tokens, which later are combined with text tokens for joint
training of an autoregressive model. Later Parti [44] pro-
posed a method to generate content-rich images with multi-
ple objects. Make-a-Scene [7] enables a control mechanism
by segmentation masks for text-to-image generation.
Current approaches build upon diffusion models, thereby
taking text-to-image synthesis quality to the next level.
GLIDE [22] improved Dall-E by adding classiﬁer-free
guidance [13]. Later, Dall-E 2 [25] utilizes the contrastive
model CLIP [24]. By means of diffusion processes, (i) a
mapping from CLIP text encodings to image encodings,
and (ii) a CLIP decoder is obtained. LDM / SD [28] ap-
plies a diffusion model on lower-resolution encoded signals

of VQ-GAN [6], showing competitive quality with a sig-
niﬁcant gain in speed and efﬁciency. Imagen [31] shows in-
credible performance in text-to-image synthesis by utilizing
large language models for text processing. Versatile Dif-
fusion [43] further uniﬁes text-to-image, image-to-text and
variations in a single multi-ﬂow diffusion model.
Because of their great image quality, it is desired to
exploit text-to-image models for video generation. How-
ever, applying diffusion models in the video domain is not
straightforward, especially due to their probabilistic gen-
eration procedure, making it difﬁcult to ensure temporal
consistency. As we show in our ablation experiments with
Fig. 10 (see also appendix), our modiﬁcations are crucial
for temporal consistency in terms of both global scene and
background motion, and for the preservation of the fore-
ground object identity.
2.2. Text-to-Video Generation
Text-to-video synthesis is a relatively new research di-
rection.
Existing approaches try to leverage autoregres-
sive transformers and diffusion processes for the genera-
tion. NUWA [40] introduces a 3D transformer encoder-
decoder framework and supports both text-to-image and
text-to-video generation. Phenaki [38] introduces a bidi-
rectional masked transformer with a causal attention mech-
anism that allows the generation of arbitrary-long videos
from text prompt sequences. CogVideo [15] extends the
text-to-image model CogView 2 [4] by tuning it using
a multi-frame-rate hierarchical training strategy to better
align text and video clips. Video Diffusion Models (VDM)
[14] naturally extend text-to-image diffusion models and
train jointly on image and video data. Imagen Video [11]
constructs a cascade of video diffusion models and utilizes
spatial and temporal super-resolution models to generate
high-resolution time-consistent videos. Make-A-Video [32]
builds upon a text-to-image synthesis model and leverages
video data in an unsupervised manner. Gen-1 [5] extends
SD and proposes a structure and content-guided video edit-
ing method based on visual or textual descriptions of de-
sired outputs. Tune-A-Video [41] proposes a new task of
one-shot video generation by extending and tuning SD on a
single reference video.
Unlike the methods mentioned above, our approach is
completely training-free, does not require massive comput-
ing power or dozens of GPUs, which makes the video gener-
ation process affordable for everyone. In this respect, Tune-
a-Video [41] comes closest to our work, as it reduces the
necessary computations to tuning on only one video. How-
ever, it still requires an optimization process and is heavily
dependent on the reference video.
3. Method
We start this section with a brief introduction of diffu-
sion models, particularly Stable Diffusion (SD) [28]. Then
we introduce the problem formulation of zero-shot text-to-
video synthesis, followed by a subsection presenting our ap-
proach. After that, to show the universality of our method,
we use it in combination with ControlNet [46] and Dream-
Booth [30] diffusion models for generating conditional and
specialized videos. Later we demonstrate the power of our
approach with the application of instruction-guided video
editing, namely, Video Instruct-Pix2Pix.
3.1. Stable Diffusion
SD is a diffusion model operating in the latent space of
an autoencoder D(E(·)), namely VQ-GAN [6] or VQ-VAE
[36], where E and D are the corresponding encoder and
decoder, respectively. More precisely if x0 ∈Rh×w×c is
the latent tensor of an input image Im to the autoencoder,
i.e. x0 = E(Im), diffusion forward process iteratively adds
Gaussian noise to the signal x0:
q(xt|xt−1) = N(xt;
p
1 −βtxt−1, βtI), t = 1, .., T (1)
where q(xt|xt−1) is the conditional density of xt given
xt−1, and {βt}T
t=1 are hyperparameters. T is chosen to be
as large that the forward process completely destroys the
initial signal x0 resulting in xT ∼N(0, I). The goal of SD
is then to learn a backward process
pθ(xt−1|xt) = N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t))
(2)
for t = T, . . . , 1, which allows to generate a valid signal x0
from the standard Gaussian noise xT . To get the ﬁnal image
generated from xT it remains to pass x0 to the decoder of
the initially chosen autoencoder: Im = D(x0).
After learning the abovementioned backward diffusion
process (see DDPM [12]) one can apply a deterministic
sampling process, called DDIM [34]:
xt−1 = √αt−1
xt −√1 −αtϵt
θ(xt)
√αt

+
p
1 −αt−1ϵt
θ(xt),
t = T, . . . , 1,
(3)
where αt = Qt
i=1(1 −βi) and
ϵt
θ(xt) =
√1 −αt
βt
xt + (1 −βt)(1 −αt)
βt
µθ(xt, t).
(4)
To get a text-to-image synthesis framework, SD guides
the diffusion processes with a textual prompt τ. Particularly
for DDIM sampling, we get:
xt−1 = √αt−1
xt −√1 −αtϵt
θ(xt, τ)
√αt

+
p
1 −αt−1ϵt
θ(xt, τ),
t = T, . . . , 1.
(5)

It is worth noting that in SD, the function ϵt
θ(xt, τ) is mod-
eled as a neural network with a UNet-like [29] architecture
composed of convolutional and (self- and cross-) attentional
blocks. xT is called the latent code of the signal x0 and
there is a method [3] to apply a deterministic forward pro-
cess to reconstruct the latent code xT given a signal x0. This
method is known as DDIM inversion. Sometimes for sim-
plicity, we will call xt, t = 1, . . . , T also the latent codes of
the initial signal x0.
3.2. Zero-Shot Text-to-Video Problem Formulation
Existing text-to-video synthesis methods require either
costly training on a large-scale (ranging from 1M to 15M
data-points) text-video paired data [40, 15, 38, 11, 14, 5] or
tuning on a reference video [41]. To make video generation
cheaper and easier, we propose a new problem: zero-shot
text-to-video synthesis. Formally, given a text description
τ and a positive integer m ∈N, the goal is to design a
function F that outputs video frames V ∈Rm×H×W ×3
(for predeﬁned resolution H × W) that exhibit temporal
consistency. To determine the function F, no training or
ﬁne-tuning must be performed on a video dataset.
Our problem formulation provides a new paradigm for
text-to-video. Noticeably, a zero-shot text-to-video method
naturally leverages quality improvements of text-to-image
models.
3.3. Method
In this paper, we approach the zero-shot text-to-video
task by exploiting the text-to-image synthesis power of Sta-
ble Diffusion (SD). As we need to generate videos instead
of images, SD should operate on sequences of latent codes.
The na¨ıve approach is to independently sample m latent
codes from standard Gaussian distribution x1
T , . . . , xm
T ∼
N(0, I) and apply DDIM sampling to obtain the corre-
sponding tensors xk
0 for k = 1, . . . , m, followed by decod-
ing to obtain the generated video sequence {D(xk
0)}m
k=1 ∈
Rm×H×W ×3. However, as shown in Fig. 10 (ﬁrst row), this
leads to completely random generation of images sharing
only the semantics described by τ but neither object appear-
ance nor motion coherence.
To address this issue, we propose to (i) introduce motion
dynamics between the latent codes x1
T , . . . , xm
T to keep the
global scene time consistent and (ii) use cross-frame atten-
tion mechanism to preserve the appearance and the identity
of the foreground object. Each of the components of our
method are described below in detail. The overview of our
method can be found in Fig. 2.
Note, to simplify notation, we will denote the entire se-
quence of latent codes by x1:m
T
= [x1
T , . . . , xm
T ].
Algorithm 1 Motion dynamics in latent codes
Require: ∆t ≥0, m ∈N, λ > 0, δ = (δx, δy) ∈
R2, Stable Diffusion (SD)
1: x1
T ∼N(0, I)
▷random sample the ﬁrst latent code
2: x1
T ′ ←DDIM Backward(x1
T , ∆t, SD) ▷perform ∆t
backward steps by SD
3: for all k = 2, 3, . . . , m do
4:
δk ←λ · (k −1)δ ▷computing global translation
vectors
5:
Wk ←Warping by δk ▷deﬁning warping functions
6:
˜xk
T ′ ←Wk(x1
T ′)
7:
xk
T ←DDPM Forward(˜xk
T ′, ∆t) ▷DDPM forward
for more motion freedom
return x1:m
T
3.3.1
Motion Dynamics in Latent Codes
Instead of sampling the latent codes x1:m
T
randomly and
independently from the standard Gaussian distribution, we
construct them by performing the following steps (see also
Algorithm 1 and Fig. 2).
1. Randomly sample the latent code of the ﬁrst frame:
x1
T ∼N(0, I).
2. Perform ∆t ≥0 DDIM backward steps on the latent
code x1
T by using the SD model and get the corre-
sponding latent x1
T ′, where T ′ = T −∆t.
3. Deﬁne a direction δ = (δx, δy) ∈R2 for the global
scene and camera motion. By default δ can be the main
diagonal direction δx = δy = 1.
4. For each frame k = 1, 2, . . . , m we want to generate,
compute the global translation vector δk = λ·(k−1)δ,
where λ is a hyperparameter controlling the amount of
the global motion.
5. Apply the constructed motion (translation) ﬂow δ1:m
to x1
T ′, denote the resulting sequence by ˜x1:m
T ′ :
˜xk
T ′ = Wk(x1
T ′) for k = 1, 2, . . . , m,
(6)
where Wk(x1
T ′) is the warping operation for transla-
tion by the vector δk.
6. Perform ∆t DDPM forward steps on each of the la-
tents ˜x2:m
T ′ and get the corresponding latent codes x2:m
T
.
Then we take the sequence x1:m
T
as the starting point of
the backward (video) diffusion process. As a result, the la-
tent codes generated with our proposed motion dynamics
lead to better temporal consistency of the global scene as
well as the background, see Fig. 10. Yet, the initial latent
codes are not constraining enough to describe particular col-
ors, identities or shapes, thus still leading to temporal incon-
sistencies, especially for the foreground object.

Figure 2: Method overview: Starting from a randomly sampled latent code x1
T , we apply ∆t DDIM backward steps to obtain
x1
T ′ using a pre-trained Stable Diffusion model (SD). A speciﬁed motion ﬁeld results for each frame k in a warping function
Wk that turns x1
T ′ to xk
T ′. By enhancing the latent codes with motion dynamics, we determine the global scene and camera
motion and achieve temporal consistency in the background and the global scene. A subsequent DDPM forward application
delivers latent codes xk
T for k = 1, . . . , m. By using the (probabilistic) DDPM method, a greater degree of freedom is
achieved with respect to the motion of objects (see appendix Sec. 6.2). Finally, the latent codes are passed to our modiﬁed
SD model using the proposed cross-frame attention, which uses keys and values from the ﬁrst frame to generate the image of
frame k = 1, . . . , m. By using cross-frame attention, the appearance and the identity of the foreground object are preserved
throughout the sequence. Optionally, we apply background smoothing. To this end, we employ salient object detection to
obtain for each frame k a mask M k indicating the foreground pixels. Finally, for the background (using the mask M k), a
convex combination between the latent code x1
t of frame one warped to frame k and the latent code xk
t is used to further
improve the temporal consistency of the background.
3.3.2
Reprogramming Cross-Frame Attention
To address the issue mentioned above, we use a cross-frame
attention mechanism to preserve the information about (in
particular) the foreground object’s appearance, shape, and
identity throughout the generated video.
To leverage the power of cross-frame attention and at the
same time exploit a pretrained SD without retraining, we
replace each of its self-attention layers with a cross-frame
attention, with the attention for each frame being on the ﬁrst
frame. More precisely in the original SD UNet architecture
ϵt
θ(xt, τ), each self-attention layer takes a feature map x ∈
Rh×w×c, linearly projects it into query, key, value features
Q, K, V ∈Rh×w×c, and computes the layer output by the
following formula (for simplicity described here for only
one attention head) [37]:
Self-Attn(Q, K, V ) = Softmax
QKT
√c

V.
(7)
In our case, each attention layer receives m inputs:
x1:m = [x1, . . . , xm] ∈Rm×h×w×c.
Hence, the lin-
ear projection layers produce m queries, keys, and values
Q1:m, K1:m, V 1:m, respectively.
Therefore, we replace each self-attention layer with a
cross-frame attention of each frame on the ﬁrst frame as
follows:
Cross-Frame-Attn(Qk, K1:m, V 1:m) =
Softmax
Qk(K1)T
√c

V 1
(8)
for k = 1, . . . , m. By using cross frame attention, the ap-
pearance and structure of the objects and background as
well as identities are carried over from the ﬁrst frame to
subsequent frames, which signiﬁcantly increases the tem-
poral consistency of the generated frames (see Fig. 10 and
the appendix, Figures 16, 20, 21).
3.3.3
Background smoothing (Optional)
We further improve temporal consistency of the background
using a convex combination of background-masked latent
codes between the ﬁrst frame and frame k.
This is es-
pecially helpful for video generation from textual prompts
when one or no initial image and no further guidance are
provided.
In more detail, given the generated sequence of our video
generator, x1:m
0
, we apply (an in-house solution for) salient
object detection [39] to the decoded images to obtain a cor-
responding foreground mask M k for each frame k. Then
we warp x1
t according to the employed motion dynamics
deﬁned by Wk and denote the result by ˆxk
t := Wk(x1
t).

(a) a high quality realistic photo of a cute cat running in a beautiful meadow
(b) an astronaut is skiing down a hill
(c) a dog is walking down the street
(d) a high quality realistic photo of a panda walking alone down the street
Figure 3: Text-to-Video results of our method. Depicted frames show that identities and appearances are temporally consis-
tent and ﬁtting to the textual prompt. For more results, see Appendix Sec. 6.
Text prompt: "A
horse is galloping
on the street"
zero_conv
zero_conv
Condition:
Canny
edges,
poses,
etc.
zero_conv
Text2Video-Zero
ControlNet
Figure 4: The overview of Text2Video-Zero + ControlNet
Background smoothing is achieved by a convex combi-
nation between the actual latent code xk
t and the warped
latent code ˆxk
t on the background, i.e.,
xk
t = M k ⊙xk
t + (1 −M k) ⊙(αˆxk
t + (1 −α)xk
t ), (9)
for k = 1, . . . , m, where α is a hyperparameter, which
we empirically choose α = 0.6. Finally, DDIM sampling
is employed on xk
t , which delivers video generation with
background smoothing. We use background smoothing in
our video generation from text when no guidance is pro-
vided. For an ablation study on background smoothing, see
the appendix, Sec. 6.2.
3.4. Conditional and Specialized Text-to-Video
Recently powerful controlling mechanisms [46, 21, 17]
emerged to guide the diffusion process for text-to-image
generation. Particularly, ControlNet [46] enables to con-
dition the generation process using edges, pose, semantic
masks, image depths, etc. However, a direct application of
ControlNet in the video domain leads to temporal inconsis-
tencies and to severe changes of object appearance, identity,
and the background (see Fig. 10 and the appendix Figures
16, 20, 21). It turns out that our modiﬁcations on the basic
diffusion process for videos result in more consistent videos
guided by ControlNet conditions. We would like to point
out again that our method does not require any ﬁne-tuning
or optimization processes.
More speciﬁcally, ControlNet creates a trainable copy
of the encoder (including the middle blocks) of the UNet
ϵt
θ(xt, τ) while additionally taking the input xt and a con-
dition c, and adds the outputs of each layer to the skip-
connections of the original UNet. Here c can be any type

(a) a panda dancing in Antarctica
(b) a cyborg dancing near a volcano
(c) an astronaut dancing in the outer space
Figure 5: Conditional generation with pose control. For
more results see appendix, Sec. 8.
(a) oil painting of a girl dancing close-up
(b) Cyberpunk boy with a hat dancing close-up
Figure 6: Conditional generation with edge control. For
more results see appendix, Sec. 7.
of condition, such as edge map, scribbles, pose (body land-
marks), depth map, segmentation map, etc. The trainable
branch is being trained on a speciﬁc domain for each type
of the condition c resulting in an effective conditional text-
to-image generation mechanism.
To guide our video generation process with ControlNet
we apply our method to the basic diffusion process, i.e.
enrich the latent codes x1:m
T
with motion information and
change the self-attentions into cross-frame attentions in the
main UNet. While adopting the main UNet for video gener-
ation task, we apply the ControlNet pretrained copy branch
per-frame on each xk
t for k = 1, . . . , m in each diffusion
time-step t = T, . . . , 1 and add the ControlNet branch out-
puts to the skip-connections of the main UNet.
Furthermore, for our conditional generation task, we
adopted the weights of specialized DreamBooth (DB) [30]
(a) oil painting of a beautiful girl avatar style
(b) gta-5 style
Figure 7: Conditional generation with edge control and DB
models.
models1. This gives us specialized time-consistent video
generations (see Fig. 7).
3.5. Video Instruct-Pix2Pix
With the rise of text-guided image editing methods
such as Prompt2Prompt [9], Instruct-Pix2Pix [2], SDEdit
[19], etc., text-guided video editing approaches emerged
[1, 16, 41]. While these methods require complex optimiza-
tion processes, our approach enables the adoption of any
SD-based text-guided image editing algorithm to the video
domain without any training or ﬁne-tuning. Here we take
the text-guided image editing method Instruct-Pix2Pix and
combine it with our approach. More precisely, we change
the self-attention mechanisms in Instruct-Pix2Pix to cross-
frame attentions according to Eq. 8. Our experiments show
that this adaptation signiﬁcantly improves the consistency
of the edited videos (see Fig. 9) over the na¨ıve per-frame
usage of Instruct-Pix2Pix.
4. Experiments
4.1. Implementation Details
We take the Stable Diffusion [28] code2 with its pre-
trained weights from version 1.5 as basis and implement
our modiﬁcations. In our experiments, we generate m = 8
frames with 512 × 512 resolution for each video. However,
our framework allows generating any number of frames, ei-
ther by increasing m, or by employing our method in an
auto-regressive fashion where the last generated frame m
becomes the ﬁrst frame in computing the next m frames.
For text-to-video generation, we take T ′ = 881, T = 941,
while for conditional and specialized generation, and for
1Avatar
model:
https://civitai.com/models/9968/
avatar-style.
GTA-5
model:
https://civitai.com/
models/1309/gta5-artwork-diffusion.
2https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers. We also
beneﬁt from the codebase of Tune-A-Video https://github.com/
showlab/Tune-A-Video.

Video Instruct-Pix2Pix, we take T ′ = T = 1000.
For a conditional generation, we use the codebase3 of
ControlNet [46]. For specialized models, we take Dream-
Booth [30] models from publicly available sources.
For
Video Instruct-Pix2Pix, we use the codebase4 of Instruct
Pix2Pix [2].
4.2. Qualitative Results
All applications of Text2Video-Zero show that it suc-
cessfully generates videos where the global scene and the
background are time consistent and the context, appear-
ance, and identity of the foreground object are maintained
throughout the entire sequence.
In the case of text-to-video, we observe that it generates
high-quality videos that are well-aligned to the text prompt
(see Fig. 3 and the appendix). For instance, the depicted
panda shows a naturally walking on the street. Likewise,
using additional guidance from edges or poses (see Fig. 5,
Fig, 6 and Fig. 7 and the appendix), high quality videos are
generated matching the prompt and the guidance that show
great temporal consistency and identity preservation.
In the case of Video Instruct-Pix2Pix (see Fig. 1 and
the appendix) generated videos possess high-ﬁdelity with
respect to the input video, while following closely the in-
struction.
4.3. Comparison with Baselines
We compare our method with two publicly available
baselines: CogVideo [15] and Tune-A-Video [41]. Since
CogVideo is a text-to-video method we compare with it in
pure text-guided video synthesis settings. With Tune-A-
Video we compare in our Video Instruct-Pix2Pix setting.
4.3.1
Quantitative Comparison
To show quantitative results, we evaluate the CLIP score
[10], which indicates video-text alignment. We randomly
take 25 videos generated by CogVideo and synthesize cor-
responding videos using the same prompts according to our
method. The CLIP scores for our method and CogVideo
are 31.19 and 29.63, respectively. Our method thus slightly
outperforms CogVideo, even though the latter has 9.4 bil-
lion parameters and requires large-scale training on videos.
4.3.2
Qualitative Comparison
We present several results of our method in Fig. 8 and
provide a qualitative comparison to CogVideo [15]. Both
methods show good temporal consistency throughout the
3https://github.com/lllyasviel/ControlNet.
4https://github.com/timothybrooks/
instruct-pix2pix.
sequence, preserving the identity of the object and back-
ground.
However, our method shows better text-video
alignment. For instance, while our method correctly gen-
erates a video of a man riding a bicycle in the sunshine
in Fig. 8(b), CogVideo sets the background to moon light.
Also in Fig. 8(a), our method correctly shows a man run-
ning in the snow, while neither the snow nor a man running
are clearly visible in the video generated by CogVideo.
Qualitative results of Video Instruct-Pix2Pix and a visual
comparison with per-frame Instruct-Pix2Pix and Tune-A-
Video are shown in Fig. 9. While Instruct-Pix2Pix shows
a good editing performance per frame, it lacks temporal
consistency. This becomes evident especially in the video
depicting a skiing person, where the snow and the sky are
drawn using different styles and colors. Using our Video
Instruct-Pix2Pix method, these issues are solved resulting
in temporally consistent video edits throughout the entire
sequence.
While Tune-A-Video creates temporally consistent video
generations, it is less aligned to the instruction guidance
than our method, struggles creating local edits and losses
details of the input sequence. This becomes apparent when
looking at the edit of the dancer video depicted in Fig. 9 (left
side). In contrast to Tune-A-Video, our method draws the
entire dress brighter and at the same time better preserves
the background, e.g. the wall behind the dancer is almost
kept the same. Tune-A-Video draws a severely modiﬁed
wall. Moreover, our method is more faithful to the input
details, e.g., Video Instruct-Pix2Pix draws the dancer us-
ing the pose exactly as provided (Fig. 9 left), and shows all
skiing persons appearing in the input video (compare last
frame of Fig. 9(right)), in constrast to Tune-A-Video. All
the above-mentioned weaknesses of Tune-A-Video can also
be observed in our additional evaluations that are provided
in the appendix, Figures 23, 24.
4.4. Ablation Study
We perform an ablation study on two main components
of our method: making the initial latent codes coherent to a
motion, and using cross-frame attention on the ﬁrst frame
instead of self-attention (for an ablation study on back-
ground smoothing see appendix Sec. 6.2). The qualitative
results are presented in Fig. 10. With the base model only,
i.e. without our changes (ﬁrst row), no temporal consistency
is achieved.
This is especially severe for unconstrained
text-to-video generations. For example, the appearance and
position of the horse changes very quickly, and the back-
ground is utterly inconsistent. Using our proposed motion
dynamics (second row), the general concept of the video is
preserved better throughout the sequence. For example, all
frames show a close-up of a horse in motion. Likewise, the
appearance of the woman and the background in the mid-
dle four ﬁgures (using ControlNet with edge guidance) is

(a) a man is running in the snow
(b) a man is riding a bicycle in the sunshine
(c) a man is walking in the rain
Figure 8: Comparison of our method vs CogVideo on text-to-video generation task (left is ours, right is CogVideo [15]). For
more comparisons, see appendix Fig. 12.
Original
color his dress white
make it Van Gogh Starry Night style
Video
Instruct-
Pix2Pix
(Ours)
Instruct-Pix2Pix
Tune-A-Video
Figure 9: Comparison of Video Instruct-Pix2Pix(ours) with Tune-A-Video and per-frame Instruct-Pix2Pix. For more com-
parisons see our appendix.
greatly improved.
Using our proposed cross frame attention (third row), we
see across all generations improved preservation of the ob-
ject identities and their appearances. Finally, by combining
both concepts (last row), we achieve the best temporal co-
herence. For instance, we see the same background motifs
and also about object identity preservation in the last four
columns and at the same time a natural transition between
the generated images.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we addressed the problem of zero-shot text-
to-video synthesis and proposed a novel method for time-
consistent video generation. Our approach does not require
any optimization or ﬁne-tuning, making text-to-video gen-
eration and its applications affordable for everyone.
We
demonstrated the effectiveness of our method for various
applications, including conditional and specialized video
generation, and Video Instruct-Pix2Pix, i.e., instruction-
guided video editing. Our contributions to the ﬁeld include

No Motion in Latents
No Cross-Frame Attention
Motion in Latents
No Cross-Frame Attention
No Motion in Latents
Cross-Frame Attention
Motion in Latents
Cross-Frame Attention
Figure 10: Ablation study showing the effect of our proposed components for text-to-video and text-guided video editing.
Additional ablation study results are provided in the appendix.
presenting a new problem of zero-shot text-to-video syn-
thesis, showing the utilization of text-to-image diffusion
models for generating time-consistent videos, and provid-
ing evidence of the effectiveness of our method for various
video synthesis applications. We believe that our proposed
method will open up new possibilities for video generation
and editing, making it accessible and affordable for every-
one.
References
[1] Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kas-
ten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-driven layered image
and video editing. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th
European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022,
Proceedings, Part XV, pages 707–723. Springer, 2022. 7
[2] Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. In-
structpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09800, 2022. 2, 7, 8, 13, 24, 25
[3] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models
beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021. 4
[4] Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Wenyi Hong, and Jie Tang.
Cogview2: Faster and better text-to-image generation via hi-
erarchical transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14217,
2022. 3
[5] Patrick Esser,
Johnathan Chiu,
Parmida Atighehchian,
Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Germanidis.
Structure
and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03011, 2023. 2, 3, 4
[6] Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming
transformers for high-resolution image synthesis.
In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 12873–12883, 2021. 3
[7] Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin,
Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman.
Make-a-scene: Scene-
based text-to-image generation with human priors. In Com-
puter Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel
Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV,
pages 89–106. Springer, 2022. 2
[8] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020. 2
[9] Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kﬁr Aberman,
Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-to-prompt im-
age editing with cross attention control.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.01626, 2022. 7
[10] Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras,
and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation met-
ric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718,
2021. 8
[11] Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang,
Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P Kingma, Ben
Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen
video: High deﬁnition video generation with diffusion mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022. 2, 3, 4
[12] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffu-
sion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2, 3
[13] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.
Classiﬁer-free diffusion
guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598, 2022. 2
[14] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William
Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video dif-
fusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458, 2022. 2, 3,
4
[15] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu,
and Jie Tang.
Cogvideo:
Large-scale pretraining for

text-to-video generation via transformers.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.15868, 2022. 3, 4, 8, 9, 13, 15
[16] Yao-Chih Lee, Ji-Ze Genevieve Jang, Yi-Ting Chen, Eliza-
beth Qiu, and Jia-Bin Huang. Shape-aware text-driven lay-
ered video editing. arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2301, 2023.
7
[17] Xihui Liu, Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Gong Zhang,
Arman Chopikyan, Yuxiao Hu, Humphrey Shi, Anna
Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. More control for free! im-
age synthesis with semantic diffusion guidance. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
Computer Vision, pages 289–299, 2023. 6
[18] Elman Mansimov, Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Rus-
lan Salakhutdinov. Generating images from captions with
attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02793, 2015. 2
[19] Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-
Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit: Image synthesis and
editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.01073, 2021. 7
[20] Eyal Molad, Eliahu Horwitz, Dani Valevski, Alex Rav
Acha, Yossi Matias, Yael Pritch, Yaniv Leviathan, and Yedid
Hoshen. Dreamix: Video diffusion models are general video
editors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01329, 2023. 2
[21] Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhon-
gang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie. T2i-adapter: Learning
adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image
diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023. 6
[22] Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav
Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and
Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation
and editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.10741, 2021. 2
[23] Tingting Qiao, Jing Zhang, Duanqing Xu, and Dacheng Tao.
Mirrorgan: Learning text-to-image generation by redescrip-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1505–1514,
2019. 2
[24] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervi-
sion. In International conference on machine learning, pages
8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 2
[25] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu,
and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image gen-
eration with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125,
2022. 2
[26] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray,
Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever.
Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
2
[27] Scott E Reed, Zeynep Akata, Santosh Mohan, Samuel Tenka,
Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee. Learning what and where
to draw. Advances in neural information processing systems,
29, 2016. 2
[28] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 2, 3, 7
[29] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-
net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmen-
tation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference,
Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III
18, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. 4
[30] Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch,
Michael Rubinstein, and Kﬁr Aberman. Dreambooth: Fine
tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022. 3, 7,
8, 21
[31] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala
Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed
Ghasemipour,
Burcu Karagol Ayan,
S Sara Mahdavi,
Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
Photorealistic text-to-image
diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.11487, 2022. 2, 3
[32] Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An,
Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual,
Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation
without text-video data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792,
2022. 2, 3
[33] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan,
and Surya Ganguli.
Deep unsupervised learning using
nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
2
[34] Jiaming
Song,
Chenlin
Meng,
and
Stefano
Ermon.
Denoising diffusion implicit models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.02502, 2020. 2, 3
[35] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Ab-
hishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based
generative modeling through stochastic differential equa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456, 2020. 2
[36] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete
representation learning. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 30, 2017. 3
[37] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017. 2, 5
[38] Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kin-
dermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang, Mohammad Taghi
Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan.
Phenaki: Variable length video generation from open domain
textual description. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02399, 2022.
3, 4
[39] Wenguan Wang, Qiuxia Lai, Huazhu Fu, Jianbing Shen,
Haibin Ling, and Ruigang Yang.
Salient object detec-
tion in the deep learning era: An in-depth survey.
IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
44(6):3239–3259, 2021. 5
[40] Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang,
Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. N¨uwa: Visual synthesis pre-
training for neural visual world creation.
In Computer

Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv,
Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XVI, pages
720–736. Springer, 2022. 3, 4
[41] Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei,
Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and
Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image
diffusion models for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.11565, 2022. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 13, 25
[42] Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang,
Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong He. Attngan: Fine-
grained text to image generation with attentional generative
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 1316–
1324, 2018. 2
[43] Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, Eric Zhang, Kai Wang,
and Humphrey Shi.
Versatile diffusion:
Text, images
and variations all in one diffusion model.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.08332, 2022. 2, 3
[44] Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gun-
jan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Alexander Ku, Yin-
fei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al.
Scaling autoregres-
sive models for content-rich text-to-image generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022. 2
[45] Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiao-
gang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris N Metaxas. Stack-
gan: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked
generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision, pages 5907–
5915, 2017. 2
[46] Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional
control to text-to-image diffusion models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.05543, 2023. 3, 6, 8

Appendix
This supplementary material provides additional results
to show the quality of our text-to-video generation method
and its applications, and the importance of individual parts
of our approach.
The quality of our text-to-video method without addi-
tional conditioning or specialization is investigated further
in Sec. 6.
To this end, qualitative results are presented
and compared to the only publicly available state-of-the-art
competitor CogVideo [15]. In order to analyze the relevance
of our proposed procedures, several ablation studies are per-
formed qualitatively.
Sec. 7 supplements our paper by elaborating results for
conditional text-to-video generation guided by pose infor-
mation. In Sec. 8 we discuss more results of conditional
text-to-video generation guided by edge information. Qual-
itative results and extensive ablation studies are presented.
Finally, Sec. 9 provides additional qualitative results
and more comparison with a recent state-of-the art method
Tune-A-Video [41] for the instruction-guided video editing
task and compares to our Video Instruct-Pix2Pix method.
6. Additional Experiments for Text-to-Video
Unconditional Generation
6.1. Qualitative results
We provide additional qualitative results of our method
in the setting of text-to-video unconditional synthesis. For
high-quality generation, we append to each prompt pre-
sented in subsequent ﬁgures the sufﬁx ”high quality, HD,
8K, trending on artstation, high focus”.
Fig. 11 shows qualitative results for different actions,
e.g. ”skiing”, ”waving” or ”dancing”. Thanks to our pro-
posed attention modiﬁcation, generated frames are consis-
tent across time regarding style and scene. We obtain plau-
sible motions due to the proposed motion latent approach.
As can be seen in Fig. 12, our method performs compa-
rable or sometimes even better than a state-of-the-art ap-
proach CogVideo[15] which has been trained on a large-
scale video data in contrast with our optimization-free ap-
proach. Fig. 12(a-b)&(e) show that generated videos by our
method are more text-aligned than CogVideo, regarding the
scene. Also the depicted motion is with higher quality in
several video generation (e.g. Fig. 12(a)&(e)&(g)).
6.2. Ablation Studies
We conduct additional ablation studies regarding back-
ground smoothing, cross-frame attention, latent motion and
the number ∆t of DDPM forward steps.
Timestep to apply motion on latents: Applying motion
on the latent codes xT (corresponding to ∆t = 0) leads
mainly to a global shift without any individual motion of the
object, as can be seen for instance at the video of the horse
galloping or the gorilla dancing in Fig. 13. It is thus crucial
to apply motion on the latents for T ′ < T. We empirically
set ∆t = 60 in our method, which provides good object
motions (see Fig. 13).
Background smoothing: We visualize the impact of us-
ing background smoothing in Fig. 14 and Fig. 15. When
background smoothing is turned on, α = 0.6 is used. When
activate, the background is more consistent and better pre-
served (see e.g. red sign in Fig. 15).
Cross-frame attention and motion latents: Finally, we
present additional results where we study the importance
of cross-frame attention and motion information on latent
codes in Fig. 16. Without cross-frame attention and without
motion information on latents the scene differs from frame
to frame, and the identity of the main object is not pre-
served. With motion on latents activated, the poses of the
objects are better aligned. Yet, the appearance differs be-
tween the frames (e.g. when looking at the depicted dog se-
quence). The identity is much better preserved when cross-
frame attention is activated. Also the background scene is
more aligned. Finally, we obtain the best results when both,
cross-frame attention and motion on latents are activated.
7. Text-to-Video with Edge Guidance
In Fig. 17 we present more video generation results by
guiding our method with edge information. In Fig. 20 we
show the effect of our cross-frame attention and motion in
latents for text-to-video generation with edge guidance. As
can be noticed when using CF-Attn layer the generation pre-
serves the identity of the person better, and using motion in
latents further improves the temporal consistency.
8. Text-to-Video with Pose Guidance
In Fig. 19 we present additional results of our method
guided by pose information. In Fig. 21 we show the effect of
our cross-frame attention and motion information in latents.
9. Video Instruct-Pix2Pix
In Fig. 22 we present additional results of instruct-
guided video editing by using our approach combined with
Instruct-Pix2Pix [2]. As shown in Figures 23 and 24 our
method outperforms naive per-frame approach of Instruct-
Pix2Pix and a recent state-of-the-art method Tune-A-Video
[41]. Particularly, while being semantically aware of text-
guided edits, Tune-A-Video has limitations in localized
editing, and struggles to transfer the style and color infor-
mation. On the other hand Instruct-Pix2Pix makes visually
plausible edits on image level but has issues with tempo-
ral consistency. In contrast with the mentioned approaches
our method preserves the temporal consistency when edit-
ing videos by given prompts.

(a) a high quality realistic photo of a panda surﬁng on a wakeboard
(b) a high quality realistic photo of a panda playing guitar on times square
(c) an astronaut is skiing down a hill
(d) A bear dancing on times square
(e) an astronaut is waving his hands on the moon
(f) a high quality realistic photo of a cute cat running on lawn
Figure 11: Qualitative results of our text-to-video generation method for different prompts.

(a) A panda dancing on times square.
(b) A bear walking on a mountain.
(c) A cat running on the lawn.
(d) A horse galloping on the street.
(e) An astronaut skiing down a hill.
(f) A dog running on the street.
(g) A gorilla walking down the street.
Figure 12: Qualitative comparison between CogVideo [15] (frames 1-4 in each row) and our method (frames 5-8 in each
row).

∆t = 0
∆t = 60
∆t = 0
∆t = 60
∆t = 0
∆t = 60
Figure 13: Ablation study on the number ∆t of DDPM forward steps. The prompts to our method for text-to-video generation
are (from left to right, top to bottom): “A bear walking on a mountain”, “a gorilla dancing on times square”, “A horse galloping
on a street”, “a sloth walking down the street”, “A bear dancing on times square”, “A cat walking down the street.”

(a) a bear walking on a mountain, no background smoothing
(b) a bear walking on a mountain, with background smoothing
(c) a gorilla dancing on times square, no background smoothing
(d) a gorilla dancing on times square, with background smoothing
Figure 14: Ablation study on background smoothing.

(a) a panda walking alone down the street, no background smoothing
(b) a panda walking alone down the street, with background smoothing
(c) an astronaut walking on a street, no background smoothing
(d) an astronaut walking on a street, with background smoothing
Figure 15: Ablation study on background smoothing.

No Motion in latents.
No CF-Attention
Motion In latents.
No CF-Attention
No Motion In latents.
CF-Attention
Motion In latents.
CF-Attention
No Motion In latents.
No CF-Attention
Motion In latents.
No CF-Attention
No Motion In latents.
CF-Attention
Motion In latents.
CF-Attention
Figure 16: Ablation study on relevance of CF-Attention and Motion In latents. The left half of the rows 1-4 are generated
with the prompt “A bear dancing on times square”. The right half of the rows 1-4 are generated with the prompt “A cat
walking on a street”. The left half or the rows 5-8 are generated with the prompts “A Minion dancing on times square”. The
right half of the rows 5 - 8 are generated with the prompt “A dog walking on a street.”

(a) wild fox is walking, a high-quality, detailed and professional photo
(b) beautiful girl Halloween style, a high-quality, detailed and professional photo
(c) a hawk, a high-quality, detailed and professional photo
(d) a santa claus, a high-quality, detailed and professional photo
(e) oil painting of a deer, a high-quality, detailed and professional photo
(f) a tiger, a high-quality, detailed and professional photo
(g) a jellyﬁsh, a high-quality, detailed and professional photo
Figure 17: Conditional generation of our method with edge control.
