Text-to-image Diffusion Models in Generative AI: A
Survey
Chenshuang Zhanga Chaoning Zhangb1, Mengchun Zhanga,
In So Kweona, Junmo Kima
aKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
bKyung Hee University,
Abstract
This survey reviews the progress of diffusion models in generating images from text,
i.e. text-to-image diffusion models. As a self-contained work, this survey starts with
a brief introduction of how diffusion models work for image synthesis, followed by
the background for text-conditioned image synthesis. Based on that, we present an
organized review of pioneering methods and their improvements on text-to-image gen-
eration. We further summarize applications beyond image generation, such as text-
guided generation for various modalities like videos, and text-guided image editing.
Beyond the progress made so far, we discuss existing challenges and promising future
directions.
Keywords: Generative models, Diffusion models, Text-to-image generation
1. Introduction
A picture is worth a thousand words. Images often convey stories more effectively
than text alone. The ability to visualize from text enhances human understanding and
enjoyment. Therefore, creating a system that generates realistic images from text de-
scriptions, i.e., the text-to-image (T2I) task, is a significant step towards achieving
human-like or general artificial intelligence. With the development of deep learning,
text-to-image task has become one of the most impressive applications in computer
1Corresponding author.
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
November 11, 2024
arXiv:2303.07909v3  [cs.CV]  8 Nov 2024

vibrant portrait painting of
Salvador Dal´ı with a robotic
half face
a shiba inu wearing a beret
and black turtleneck
a close up of a handpalm with
leaves growing from it
an espresso machine that makes
coffee from human souls, artstation
panda mad scientist mixing
sparkling chemicals, artstation
a corgi’s head depicted as
an explosion of a nebula
a dolphin in an astronaut
suit on saturn, artstation
a propaganda poster depicting a cat
dressed as french emperor
napoleon holding a piece of cheese
a teddy bear on a skateboard
in times square
Figure 1: Generated images by text-to-image diffusion models. These images are examples generated by the
pioneering model DALL-E2 [1] from OpenAI. Based on user-input text prompts, the model can generate
very imaginative images with high fidelity.
vision [2, 1].
We summarize the timeline of representative studies for text-to-image generation
in Figure 2. AlignDRAW [3] marked a significant step by creating images from nat-
2

AlignDRAW
2015.11.09
StackGAN
2016.12.10
ControlGAN
2019.09.16
CogView
2021.05.26
Text-conditional GAN
2016.05.17
AttnGAN
2017.11.28
DALL-E
2021.02.24
NUWA
2021.11.24
VQ Diffusion
2021.11.29
GLIDE
2021.12.20
Imagen
2022.05.23
Stable Diffusion
(SD) 2021.12.20
DALL-E 2
2022.04.13
Parti
2022.06.22
SD XL
2023.07.26
DALL-E 3
2023.08.20
SD 3
2024.02.22
SD 3.5
2024.10.22
Figure 2: Representive works on text-to-image task over time. The GAN-based methods, autoregressive
methods, and diffusion-based methods are masked in yellow, blue and red, respectively. We abbreviate
Stable Diffusion as SD for brevity in this figure. As diffusion-based models have achieved unprecedented
success in image generation, this work mainly discusses the pioneering studies for text-to-image generation
using diffusion models.
ural language, albeit with limited realism. Text-conditional GAN [4] emerged as the
first fully end-to-end differential architecture extending from character-level input to
pixel-level output, but was always trained on small-scale data. Autoregressive methods
further utilize large-scale training data for text-to-image generation, such as DALL-
E [5] from OpenAI. However, autoregressive nature makes these methods [5, 6, 7, 8]
suffer from high computation costs and sequential error accumulation.
More recently, diffusion models (DMs) have emerged as the leading method in
text-to-image generation [9, 1]. Figure 1 shows example images generated by the pi-
oneering text-to-image diffusion model DALL-E2 [1], demonstrating extraordinary
fidelity and imagination. However, the vast amount of research in this field makes it
difficult for readers to learn the key breakthroughs without a comprehensive survey. A
branch of existing surveys [10, 11, 12] reviews the progress of the diffusion model in
all fields, offering a limited introduction specifically on text-to-image synthesis. Other
studies [13, 11, 14] focus on text-to-image tasks using GAN-based approaches, lacking
the introduction of diffusion-based methods.
To our knowledge, this is the first survey to review the progress of diffusion-based
text-to-image generation. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We also sum-
marize the paper outline in Figure 3. Section 2 introduces the background of diffusion
models. Section 3 covers pioneering studies on text-to-image diffusion models, while
Section 4 discusses the follow-up advancements. Section 5 discusses the evaluation of
text-to–image diffusion models from the technical and ethical perspectives. Section 6
3

Sec 6: Applications beyond 
image generation
Sec 2: Background on 
diffusion models
Sec 3: Pioneering text-to 
image diffusion models
Sec 4: Model advancements
Sec 7: Challenges 
and outlook
Sec 5: Model evaluation
Development 
before DDPM
DDPM
Guidance in image 
synthesis
Frameworks in 
pixel space
Frameworks in 
latent space
Architecture 
optimization
Image synthesis with 
flexible control
Text-to-X generation
Text-guided image 
editing
Technical evaluation
Ethical issues and risks
GLIDE
Imagen
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPM)
Score-based Generative model(SGM)
Text-to-video
Text-to-3D
Text-to-art
DALL-E2
Stable Diffusion
Recent progress
Denoising process
On the choice of guidance
Model architecture
Model acceleration
Textual inversion for concept control
Spatial control
Versatile content control
Retrieval for OOD generation
Evaluation metrics
Evaluation benchmarks
Ethical risks from the datasets
Misuse for malicious purposes
Security and privacy risks
Inversion for image editing
Editing with mask control
Expanded editing with flexible texts
Figure 3: Paper outline. We summarize each section in this figure. Our work not only offers a comprehensive
overview of text-to-image diffusion models, but also provides readers a broader perspective by discussing
related areas such as text-to-X generation.
4

explores tasks beyond text-to-image generation., such as video generation and 3D ob-
ject generation. Finally, we discuss challenges and future opportunities in text-to-image
generation tasks.
2. Background on diffusion models
Diffusion models (DMs), also widely known as diffusion probabilistic models [15],
are a family of generated models that are Markov chains trained with variational in-
ference [16]. The learning goal of DM is to reserve a process of perturbing the data
with noise, i.e. diffusion, for sample generation [15, 16]. As a milestone work, de-
noising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) [16] was published in 2020 and sparked
an exponentially increasing interest in the community of generative models afterwards.
Here, we provide a self-contained introduction to DDPM by covering the most related
progress before DDPM and how unconditional DDPM works with image synthesis as
a concrete example. Moreover, we summarize how guidance helps in conditional DM,
which is an important foundation for understanding text-conditional DM for text-to-
image.
2.1. Development before DDPM
The advent of DDPM [16] can be mainly attributed to two early attempts: score-
based generative models (SGM) [17] being investigated in 2019 and diffusion proba-
bilistic models (DPM) [15] emerging as early as in 2015. Therefore, it is important to
revisit the working mechanism of DPM and SGM before we introduce DDPM.
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPM). DPM [15] is the first work to model
probability distribution by estimating the reversal of Markov diffusion chain which
maps data to a simple distribution. Specifically, DPM defines a forward (inference)
process which converts a complex data distribution to a much simpler one, and then
learns the mapping by reversing this diffusion process. Experimental results on multi-
ple datasets show the effectiveness of DPM when estimating complex data distribution.
DPM can be viewed as the foundation of DDPM [16], while DDPM optimizes DPM
with improved implementations.
5

!
xT
−! · · · −!
xt
−−−−−! xt−1 −! · · · −! x0
p✓(xt−1|xt)
q(xt|xt−1)
Figure 4: Diffusion process illustrated in [16]. Diffusion models include a forward pass that adds noises to
a clean image, and a reverse pass that recovers the clean image from its noisy counterpart.
Score-based Generative model(SGM). Techniques for improving score-based gen-
erative models have also been investigated in [17]. SGM [17] proposes to perturb the
data with random Gaussian noise of various magnitudes. With the gradient of log prob-
ability density as score function, SGM generates the samples towards decreasing noise
levels and trains the model by estimating the score functions for noisy data distribu-
tion. Despite different motivations, SGM shares a similar optimization objective with
DDPM during training, which is also discussed in [16] that the DDPM under a certain
parameterization is equivalent to SGM during training.
Et∼U(1,T),x0∼q(x0),ϵ∼N(0,I)λ(t) ∥ϵ −ϵθ(xt, t)∥2
(1)
2.2. How does DDPM work for image synthesis?
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) are defined as a parameterized
Markov chain, which generates images from noise within finite transitions during in-
ference. During training, the transition kernels are learned in a reversed direction of
perturbing natural images with noise, where the noise is added to the data in each step
and estimated as the optimization target. The diffusion processes are shown in Figure 4.
Forward pass. In the forward pass, DDPM is a Markov chain where Gaussian
noise is added to data in each step until the images are destroyed. Given a data distri-
bution x0 ∼q(x0), DDPM generates xT successively with q(xt | xt−1) [16]:
q(x1:T|x0) :=
T
Y
t=1
q(xt|xt−1),
(2)
q(xt|xt−1) := N(xt;
p
1 −βtxt−1, βtI)
(3)
6

where T and βt are the diffusion steps and hyper-parameters, respectively. We only
discuss the case of Gaussian noise as transition kernels for simplicity, indicated as N
in Eq. 3. With αt := 1 −βt and ¯αt := Qt
s=0 αs, we can obtain noised image at arbitrary
step t as follows [18]:
q(xt|x0) := N(xt; √¯αtx0, (1 −¯αt)I)
(4)
Reverse pass. With the forward pass defined above, we can train the transition
kernels with a reverse process. Starting from pθ(T), we hope the generated pθ(x0) can
follow the true data distribution q(x0). Therefore, the optimization objective of model
is as follows(quoted from [18]):
Et∼U(1,T),x0∼q(x0),ϵ∼N(0,I)λ(t) ∥ϵ −ϵθ(xt, t)∥2
(5)
Considering the optimization objective similarities between DDPM and SGM, thy
are unified in [19] from the perspective of stochastic differential equations, allowing
more flexible sampling methods.
2.3. Guidance in diffusion-based image synthesis
Labels improve image synthesis. Early works on generative adversarial models
(GAN) have shown that class labels can improve the quality of generated images by
either providing a conditional input or guiding the image synthesis via an auxiliary
classifier. These practices are also introduced to diffusion models:
Conditional diffusion model: A conditional diffusion model learns from additional
information (e.g., class and text) by taking them as model input.
Guided diffusion model: During the training of a guided diffusion model, the class-
induced gradients (e.g. through an auxiliary classfier) are involved in the sampling
process.
Classifier-free guidance. Different from guided diffusion model, [20] found that
the guidance can be obtained by generative model itself without a classifier, termed
7

as classifier-free guidance. Specifically, classifier-free guidance jointly trains a sin-
gle model with unconditional score estimator ϵθ(x) and conditional ϵθ(x, c), where c
denotes the class label. A null token ∅is placed as the class label in the uncondi-
tional part, i.e., ϵθ(x) = ϵθ(x, ∅). Experimental results in [20] show that classifier-free
guidance achieves a trade-off between quality and diversity similar to that achieved by
classifier guidance. Without resorting to a classifier, classifier-free diffusion facilitates
more modalities, e.g., text in text-to-image, as guidance.
3. Pioneering text-to-image diffusion models
In this section, we introduce the pioneering text-to-image work based on diffusion
models, which can be roughly categorized considering where the diffusion process
is conducted, i.e., the pixel space or latent space. The first class of methods gener-
ates images directly from the high-dimensional pixel level, including GLIDE [9] and
Imagen [21]. Another stream of works propose to first compress the image to a low-
dimensional space, and then train the diffusion model on this latent space. Represen-
tative methods falling into the class of latent space include Stable Diffusion [2] and
DALL-E 2 [1].
3.1. Frameworks in pixel space
GLIDE: the first T2I work on DM. In essence, text-to-image is text-conditioned
image synthesis. Therefore, it is intuitive to replace the class label in class-conditioned
DM with text for making the sampling generation conditioned on text. As discussed
in Sec. 2.3, guided diffusion improves the photorealism of samples in conditional DM
and its classifier-free variant [20] facilitates handling free-form prompts. Motivated
by this, GLIDE [9] adopts classifier-free guidance in T2I by replacing original class
label with text. GLIDE [9] also investigated CLIP guidance but is less preferred by
human evaluators than classifier-free guidance for the sample photorealism and caption
similarity. As an important component in their framework, the text encoder is set to a
transformer with 24 residual blocks with a width of 2048 (roughly 1.2B parameters).
Experimental results show that GLIDE [9] outperforms DALL-E [5] in both FID and
human evaluation.
8

Semantic
 Map
crossattention
Latent Space
Conditioning
Text
Diffusion Process
denoising step
switch
skip connection
Repres
entations
Pixel Space
Images
Denoising U-Net
concat
Figure 5: Model architecture of Stable Diffusion [2]. Stable Diffusion first converts the image to a latent
space, where the diffusion process is performed. Stable Diffusion significantly improves the quality and
efficiency of image generation compared to prior models.
Imagen: encoding text with pretrained language model. Following GLIDE [9],
Imagen [21] adopts classifier-free guidance for image generation. A core difference
between GLIDE and Imagen lies in their choice of text encoder. Specifically, GLIDE
trains the text encoder together with the diffusion prior with paired image-text data,
while Imagen [21] adopts a pretrained and frozen large language model as the text en-
coder. Since the text-only corpus is significantly larger than paired image-text data,
such as 800GB used in T5 [22], the pretrained large language models are exposed
to text with a rich and wide distribution. With different T5 [22] variants as the text
encoder,
[21] reveals that increasing the size of language model improves the im-
age fidelity and image-text alignment more than enlarging the diffusion model size in
Imagen. Moreover, freezing the weights of pretrained encoder facilitates offline text
embedding, which reduces negligible computation burden to the online training of the
text-to-image diffusion prior.
3.2. Frameworks in latent space
Stable diffusion: a milestone work on latent space. A representative framework
that trains the diffusion models on latent space is Stable Diffusion, which is a scaled-
up version of Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) [2]. Following Dall-E [5] that adopts a
9

Figure 6: Model architecture of DALLE-2 [1]. DALLE-2 uses CLIP [23] model to project the image and
text to latent space.
VQ-VAE to learn a visual codebook, Stable diffusion applies VQ-GAN for the latent
representation in the first stage. Notebly, VQ-GAN improves VQ-VAE by adding an
adversarial objective to increase the naturalness of synthesized images. With the pre-
trained VAE, stable diffusion reverses a forward diffusion process that perturbs latent
space with noise. Stable diffusion also introduces cross-attention as general-purpose
conditioning for various condition signals like text. The model architecture of Stable
Diffusion is shown in Figure 5. Experimental results in [2] highlight that perform-
ing diffusion modeling on the latent space significantly outperforms that on the pixel
space in terms of complexity reduction and detail preservation. A similar approach has
also been investigated in VQ-diffusion with a mask-then-replace diffusion strategy. Re-
sembling the finding in pixel-space method, classifier-free guidance also significantly
improves the text-to-image diffusion models in latent space [2].
DALL-E2: with multimodal latent space. Another stream of text-to-image diffu-
sion models in latent space relies on multimodal contrasitve models [23], where image
embedding and text encoding are matched in the same representation space. For exam-
ple, CLIP [23] is a pioneering work learning the multimodal representations and has
been widely used in numerous text-to-image models [1]. A representative work apply-
ing CLIP is DALL-E 2, also known as unCLIP [1], which adopts the CLIP text encoder
but inverts the CLIP image encoder with a diffusion model that generates images from
CLIP latent space. Such a combination of encoder and decoder resembles the structure
10

of VAE adopted in LDM, even though the inverting decoder is non-deterministic [1].
Therefore, the remaining task is to train a prior to bridge the gap between CLIP text
and image latent space, and we term it as text-image latent prior for brevity. DALL-
E2 [1] finds that this prior can be learned by either autoregressive method or diffusion
model, but diffusion prior achieves superior performance. Moreover, experimental re-
sults show that removing this text-image latent prior leads to a performance drop by
a large margin [1], which highlights the importance of learning the text-image latent
prior. We show image examples generated by DALLE-2 in Figure 1.
Recent progress of Stable Diffusion and DALL-E family. Since the publication
of Stable Diffusion [2], multiple versions of models have been released, including Sta-
ble Diffusion 1.4, 1.5, 2.0, 2.1, XL, and 3. Starting from Stable Diffusion 2.0 [24],
a notable feature is negative prompts, which allow users to specify what they do not
wish to generate in the output image. Stable Diffusion XL [25] enhances capabilities
beyond previous versions by incorporating a larger Unet architecture, leading to im-
proved abilities such as face generation, richer visuals, and more impressive aesthetics.
Stable Diffusion 3 is built on diffusion transformer architecture [26] and use two sep-
arate sets of weights to model text and image modality. Stable Diffusion 3 improve
overall comprehension and typography of generated images. On the other hand, the
evolution of the DALL-E model has progressed from the autoregressive DALL-E [5],
to the diffusion-based DALL-E2 [1], and most recently, DALLE-3 [27]. Integrated
into the GPT-4 API, DALLE-3 showcases superior performance in capturing intricate
nuances and details.
4. Model advancements
Numerous works attempt to improve the text-to-image diffusion models, which we
roughly categorize into architecture optimization and versatile use.
4.1. Architecture optimization
On the choice of guidance. Beyond the classifier-free guidance, some works [9]
have also explored cross-modal guidance with CLIP [23]. Specifically, GLIDE [9]
11

finds that CLIP-guidance underperforms the classifier-free variant of guidance. By
contrast, another work UPainting [28] points out that lacking of a large-scale trans-
former language model makes these models with CLIP guidance difficult to encode
text prompts and generate complex scenes with details. By combing large language
model and cross-modal matching models, UPainting [28] significantly improves the
sample fidelity and image-text alignment of generated images. The general image syn-
thesis capability enables UPainting [28] to generate images in both simple and complex
scenes.
Denoising process. By default, DM during inference repeats the denoising process
on the same denoiser model, which makes sense for an unconditional image synthesis
since the goal is only to get a high-fidelity image. In the task of text-to-image synthesis,
the generated image is also required to align with the text, which implies that the de-
noiser model has to make a trade-off between these two goals. Specifically, two recent
works [29, 30] point out a phenomenon: the early sampling stage strongly relies on the
text prompt for the goal of aligning with the caption, but the later stage focuses on im-
proving image quality while almost ignoring the text guidance. Therefore, they abort
the practice of sharing model parameters during the denoising process and propose to
adopt multiple denoiser models which are specialized for different generation stages.
Specifically, ERNIE-ViLG 2.0 [29] also mitigates the problem of object-attribute by
the guidance of a text parser and object detector, improving the fine-grained semantic
control.
Model architecture. A branch of studies enhances text-to-image generation by
improving the denoising model. For instance, Free-U [31] strategically re-weights the
contributions sourced from the U-Net’s skip connections and backbone feature maps,
which improves image generation quality without additional training or fine-tuning.
The pioneering work DiT [26] proposes a diffusion transformer architecture as the
denoising model of diffusion models, which replaces the commonly-used U-Net back-
bone (see Figure 7). Pixart-α [32] is a pioneering work that adopts a transformer-based
backbone and supports high-resolution image synthesis up to 1024 × 1024 resolution
with low training cost.
Model acceleration. Diffusion models have achieved great success in image gen-
12

Multi-Head 
Self-Attention
Layer Norm
Scale, Shift
MLP
Pointwise 
Feedforward
Layer Norm
Scale, Shift
Scale
+
+
Scale
𝛾!,𝛽!
𝛼!
𝛾",𝛽"
𝛼"
Input Tokens
Conditioning
DiT Block with adaLN-Zero
Latent Diffusion Transformer
Timestep 𝑡
Label 𝑦
DiT Block
N x
Patchify
Layer Norm
Linear and Reshape
Embed
Noise
Σ
32 x 32 x 4
32 x 32 x 4
Noised 
Latent
32 x 32 x 4
Multi-Head 
Self-Attention
Layer Norm
Pointwise 
Feedforward
Layer Norm
+
+
Input Tokens
Conditioning
DiT Block with Cross-Attention
Multi-Head 
Cross-Attention
Layer Norm
+
Multi-Head 
Self-Attention
Layer Norm
Pointwise 
Feedforward
+
+
Input Tokens
Conditioning
DiT Block with In-Context Conditioning
Layer Norm
Concatenate 
on Sequence 
Dimension
Figure 7: Transformer architecture of DiT [26]. DiT trains conditional latent diffusion models with trans-
former blocks. Adaptive layer norm works best among all block types.
eration, outperforming GAN. However, one drawback of diffusion models is their slow
sampling process, which requires hundreds or thousands of iterations to generate an
image. V-prediction [33] improves the sampling speed by distilling a pre-trained diffu-
sion model with N-step DDIM sampler to a new model of N/2 sampling steps, without
hurting generation quality. Flow Matching (FM) [34] finds that employing FM with
diffusion paths results in a more robust and stable alternative for training diffusion
models. A recent work REPresentation Alignment (REPA) [35] emphasizes the key
role of representations in training large-scale diffusion models, and introduces the rep-
resentations from self-supervised models (DINO v2 [36]) to the training of diffusion
models like DiT [26] and SiT [37]. REPA [35] achieves significant acceleration results
by speeding up SiT [37] training by over 17.5×.
4.2. Image synthesis with flexible control
Textual inversion for concept control. Pioneering works on text-to-image gen-
eration [9, 21, 2, 1] rely on natural language to describe the content and styles of
generated images. However, there are cases when the text cannot exactly describe the
desired semantics by users, e.g., generating a new subject. In order to synthesize novel
scenes with certain concepts or subjects, [39, 38] introduces several reference images
with the desired concepts, then inverts the reference images to the textual descriptions.
Specifically, [39] inverts the shared concept in a couple of reference images into the
13

Figure 8: Textual inversion for concept control in Dreambooth [38]. Based on the user input images, Dream-
booth [38] finetunes a pretrained model to learn the key concept of subject in input images. The users can
further control the status of the subject by prompts such as “getting a haircut”.
text (embedding) space, i.e. ”pseudo-words”. The generated ”pseudo-words” can be
used for personalized generation. DreamBooth [38] adopts a similar technique and
mainly differs by fine-tuning (instead of freezing) the pretrained DM model for pre-
serving key visual features from the subject identity. With the learned subject, the
DreamBooth [38] allows users to control the status of subject in the generated images
by specifying in the input prompt. Figure 8 shows generated images by DreamBooth
with dog images as well as the prompt as model inputs. Textual inversion has also been
applied in other applications, such as to control the spatial relationship in [40].
Spatial control. Despite their unprecedented high image fidelity and caption sim-
ilarity, most text-to-image DMs like Imagen [21] and DALL-E2 [1] do not provide
fine-grained control of spatial layout. To this end, SpaText [41] introduces spatio-
textual (ST) representation which can be included to finetune a SOTA DM by adapting
its decoder. Specifically, the new encoder conditions both local ST and existing global
text. Therefore, the core of SpaText [41] lies in ST where the diffusion prior in trained
separately to convert the image embeddings in CLIP to its text embeddings. During
training, the ST is generated directly by using the CLIP image encoder taking the seg-
mented image object as input. A concurrent work [42] proposes to realize fine-grained
local control through a simple sketch image. Core to their approach is a Latent Guid-
ance Predictor (LGP)that is a pixel-wise MLP mapping the latent feature of a noisy
image to that of its corresponding sketch input. After being trained (see [42] for more
training details), the LGP can be deployed to the pretrained text-to-image DM with-
14

“A smiling cat, a crown, a balloon, and a red bow” 
“A giraﬀe wearing sunglasses and a tie looks very proud”
“As the aurora lights up the sky, a herd of reindeer leisurely wanders on the grassy meadow, admiring the breathtaking view, a serene lake 
quietly reﬂects the magniﬁcent display, and in the distance, a snow-capped mountain stands majestically, fantasy, 8k, highly detailed”
“A bear wearing sunglasses and a tie looks very proud”
Figure 9: Spatial control in BoxDiff [44]. BoxDiff enables to control the layout of generated images with
provided boxes or scribbles.
out the need for fine-tuning. Other representative studies for spatial control includes
BoxDiff [43] that uses the provided box or scribble to control the layout of generated
images, as shown in Figure 9.
Versatile content control. ControlNet [44] has achieved great attention due to
its powerful ability to add various conditioning controls to large pretrained models.
ControlNet [44] reuses the pretrained encoding layers as a strong backbone, and a
zero convolution architecture is proposed to ensure no harm noise could affect the
finetuning. ControlNet [44] achieves outstanding results with various conditioning
signals, such as edges, depth, and segmentation. Figure 10 shows an example from
[44] that use canny edge and human as condition to control the image generation of
Stable Diffusion model. There are also other widely used methods unifies various
signals in one model for content control, such as T2i-adapter [45], Uni-ControlNet [46],
GLIGEN [47], and Composer [48]. HumanSD [49] and HyperHuman [50] focuses on
the generation of human images by taking human skeleton as model inputs.
Retrieval for out-of-distribution generation. State-of-the-art text-to-image mod-
els assume sufficient exposure to descriptions of common entities and styles from
15

Input Canny edge
Default
“masterpiece of fairy tale, giant deer, golden antlers”
Input human pose
Default
“chef in kitchen”
“…, quaint city Galic”
“Lincoln statue”
Figure 10: Control Stable Diffusion with conditions [44]. ControlNet [44] allows users to specify conditions,
such as canny edges, in image generation of large-scale pretrained diffusion models. For example, the default
prompt is “a high-quality, detailed, and professional image”, while the users can add conditions such as
“quaint city Galic”.
training. This assumption breaks down with rare entities or vastly different styles,
leading to performance drops. To counter this, several studies [51, 52, 53, 54] use ex-
ternal databases for retrieval, a semi-parametric approach adapted from NLP [55, 56]
and GAN-based synthesis [57]. Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion Models (RDMs) [51]
use k-nearest neighbors (KNN) based on CLIP distance for enhanced diffusion guid-
ance, while KNN-diffusion [52] improves quality by adding text embeddings. Re-
Imagen [54] refines this with a single-stage framework, retrieving both images and text
in latent space, outperforming KNN-diffusion on the COCO benchmark.
5. Model evaluation
5.1. Technical evaluation
Evaluation metrics. A common metric to evaluate image quality quantitatively is
Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID), which measures the Fr´echet distance (also known
as Wasserstein-2 distance) between synthetic and real-world images. We summarize
the evaluation results of representative methods on MS-COCO dataset in Table 1 for
16

reference. The smaller the FID is, the higher the image fidelity. To measure the text-
image alignment, CLIP scores are widely applied, which trades off against FID. There
are also other metrics for text-to-image evaluation, including Inception score (IS) [58]
for image quality and R-precision for text-to-image generation.
Table 1: Image quality comparison of autoregressive
and diffusion models. Diffusion models outperforms
autoregressive models in image quality, with lower
FID on MS-COCO dataset.
model
FID (↓)
Autoregressive
CogView [6]
27.10
LAFITE [59]
26.94
DALLE [5]
17.89
Diffusion models
GLIDE [9]
12.24
Imagen [21]
7.27
Stable Diffusion [2]
12.63
DALL-E 2 [1]
10.39
Upainting [28]
8.34
ERNIE-ViLG 2.0 [29]
6.75
eDiff-I [30]
6.95
Evaluation benchmarks.
Apart
from the automatic metrics discussed
above, multiple works involve human
evaluation and propose their new eval-
uation benchmarks
[60, 21, 8, 28, 61,
54, 62].
We summarize representa-
tive benchmarks in Table 2.
For a
better evaluation of fidelity and text-
image alignment, DrawBench[21], Par-
tiPropts [8] and UniBench [28] ask the
human raters to compare generated im-
ages from different models. Specifically,
UniBench [28] proposes to evaluate the model on both simple and complex scenes
and includes both Chinese and English prompts.
PartiPropts [8] introduces a di-
verse set of over 1600 (English) prompts and also proposes a challenge dimension
that highlights why this prompt is difficult. To evaluate the model from various as-
pects, PaintSKills [60] evaluates the visual reasoning skills and social biases apart
from image quality and text-image alignment. However, PaintSKills [60] only focuses
on unseen object-color and object-shape scenario [28]. EntityDrawBench [54] further
evaluates the model with various infrequent entities in different scenes. Compared to
PartiPropts [8] with prompts at different difficulty levels, Multi-Task Benchmark [61]
proposes thirty-two tasks that evaluate different capabilities and divides each task into
three difficulty levels.
5.2. Ethical issues and risks
Ethical risks from the datasets. Text-to-image generation is a highly data-driven
task, and thus models trained on large-scale unfiltered data may suffer from even rein-
17

Table 2: Benchmarks for text-to-image generation task.
Benchmark
Measurement
Metric
Auto-eval
Human-eval
Language
DrawBench[21]
Fidelity, alignment
User preference rates
N
Y
English
UniBench [28]
Fidelity, alignment
User preference rates
N
Y
English, Chinese
PartiPrompts [8]
Fidelity, alignment
Qualitative
N
Y
English
PaintSKills [60]
Visual reasoning skills, social biases
Statistics
Y
Y
English
EntityDrawBench [54]
Entity-centric faithfulness
Human rating
N
Y
English
Multi-Task Benchmark [61]
Various capabilities
Human rating
N
Y
English
force the biases from the dataset, leading to ethical risks. [63] finds a large amount of
inappropriate content in the generated images by Stable diffusion [2] (e.g., offensive,
insulting, or threatening information), and first establishes a new test bed to evaluate
them. Moreover, it proposes Safe Latent Diffusion, which successfully removes and
suppresses inappropriate content with additional guidance. Another ethical issue, the
fairness of social group, is studied in [64, 65]. Specifically, [64] finds that simple ho-
moglyph replacements in the text descriptions can induce culture bias in models, i.e.,
generating images from different cultures. [65] introduce an Ethical NaTural Language
Interventions in Text-to-Image GENeration (ENTIGEN) benchmark dataset, which can
evaluate the change of generated images with ethical interventions by three axes: gen-
der, skin color, and culture. With intervented text prompts, [65] improves diffusion
models (e.g., Stable diffusion [2]) from the social diversity perspective. Fair Diffu-
sion [66] evaluates the fairness problem of diffusion models and mitigates this problem
at the deployment stage of diffusion models. Specifically, Fair Diffusion [66] instructs
the diffusion models on fairness with textual guidance. Another work [67] finds that a
broad range of prompts to text-to-image diffusion models could produce stereotypes,
such as simply mentioning traits, descriptors, occupations, or objects.
Misuse for malicious purposes. Text-to-image diffusion models have shown their
power in generating high-quality images. However, this also raises great concern that
the generated images may be used for malicious purposes, e.g., falsifying electronic
evidence [68]. DE-FAKE [68] is the first to conduct a systematical study on visual
forgeries of the text-to-image diffusion models, which aims to distinguish generated
images from the real ones, and also further track the source model of each fake image.
To achieve these two goals, DE-FAKE [68] analyzes from visual modality perspective,
18

and finds that images generated by different diffusion models share common features
and also present unique model-wise fingerprints. Two concurrent works [69, 70] ap-
proach the detection of faked images both by evaluating the existing detection methods
on images generated by the diffusion model, and also analyzing the frequency discrep-
ancy of images by GAN and diffusion models. [69, 70] find that the performance of
existing detection methods drops significantly on generated images by diffusion mod-
els compared to GAN. Moreover, [69] attributes the failure of existing methods to
the mismatch of high frequencies between images generated by diffusion models and
GAN. Another work [71] discusses the concern of artistic image generation from the
perspective of artists. Although agreeing that the artistic image generation may be a
promising modality for the development of art, [71] points out that the artistic image
generation may cause plagiarism and profit shifting (profits in the art market shift from
artists to model owners) problems if not properly used.
Security and privacy risks. While text-to-image diffusion models have attracted
great attention, the security and privacy risks have been neglected so far. Two pio-
neering works [72, 73] discuss the backdoor attack and privacy issues, respectively.
Inspired by the findings in [64] that a simple word replacement can invert culture
bias to models, Rickrolling the Artist [72] proposes to inject the backdoors into the
pre-trained text encoders, which will force the generated image to follow a specific
description or include certain attributes if the trigger exists in the text prompt. [73] is
the first to analyze the membership leakage problem in text-to-image generation mod-
els, where whether a certain image is used to train the target text-to-image model is
inferred. Specifically, [73] proposes three intuitions on the membership information
and four attack methods accordingly. Experiments show that all the proposed attack
methods achieve impressive results, highlighting the threat of membership leakage.
6. Applications beyond image generation
The advancement of diffusion models has inspired various applications beyond im-
age generation, such as text-to-X where X refers to a modality such as video, and
text-guided image editing. We introduce pioneering work as follows.
19

Figure 11: Text-to-video generation by Stable Video Diffusion [74] from Stable AI.
6.1. Text-to-X generation
6.1.1. Text-to-art
Artistic painting is an interesting and imaginative area that benefits from the suc-
cess of generative models. Despite the progress of GAN-based painting[75], they suf-
fer from the unstable training and model collapse problem brought by GAN. Recently,
multiple works have presented impressive images of paintings based on diffusion mod-
els, investigating improved prompts and different scenes. Multimodal guided artwork
diffusion (MGAD) [76] refines the generative process of diffusion model with mul-
timodal guidance (text and image) and achieves excellent results regarding both the
diversity and quality of generated digital artworks. In order to maintain the global con-
tent of the input image, DiffStyler [77] proposes a controllable dual diffusion model
with learnable noise in the diffusion process of the content image. During inference,
explicit content and abstract aesthetics can both be learned with two diffusion models.
Experimental results show that DiffStyler [77] achieve excellent results on both quan-
20
