The Emergence of Reproducibility and Generalizability in
Diffusion Models
Huijie Zhang1, Jinfan Zhou∗1, Yifu Lu1, Minzhe Guo1, Peng Wang1,
Liyue Shen1, and Qing Qu1
1Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of Michigan
June 11, 2024
Abstract
In this work, we investigate an intriguing and prevalent phenomenon of diffusion models
which we term as “consistent model reproducibility”: given the same starting noise input and
a deterministic sampler, different diffusion models often yield remarkably similar outputs. We
confirm this phenomenon through comprehensive experiments, implying that different diffu-
sion models consistently reach the same data distribution and score function regardless of dif-
fusion model frameworks, model architectures, or training procedures. More strikingly, our
further investigation implies that diffusion models are learning distinct distributions affected by
the training data size. This is supported by the fact that the model reproducibility manifests
in two distinct training regimes: (i) “memorization regime,” where the diffusion model over-
fits to the training data distribution, and (ii) “generalization regime,” where the model learns
the underlying data distribution. Our study also finds that this valuable property generalizes
to many variants of diffusion models, including those for conditional generation, solving in-
verse problems, and model fine-tuning. Finally, our work raises numerous intriguing theoret-
ical questions for future investigation and highlights practical implications regarding training
efficiency, model privacy, and the controlled generation of diffusion models.
Key words: diffusion model, reproducibility, memorization and generalization, interpretability
∗The first two authors contributed to this work equally.
A short version of this work has been recognized by the best paper award in NeurIPS Diffusion Model Workshop 2023.
1
arXiv:2310.05264v4  [cs.LG]  10 Jun 2024

Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Consistent Model Reproducibility
5
2.1
Measures of Reproducibility and Generalizability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Model Reproducibility Manifests in Two Regimes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Reproducibility is Rare in Generative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Analyzing Reproducibility in Two Regimes
8
3.1
Reproducibility in Memorization Regime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Reproducibility in Generalization Regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Reproducibility & Distribution Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Prevalence of Reproducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.3
Reproducibility from Noise Hyperplane to Image Manifold
. . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Beyond Unconditional Diffusion Models
15
4.1
Conditional Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Diffusion Models for Solving Inverse Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Model Reproducibility in Fine-tuning Diffusion Models.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Related Works
19
6
Conclusions and Implications
20
Appendices
28
A Unconditional Diffusion Model
28
B
Theoretical Analysis
30
C Experiment setting for Section 3.2.1
37
C.1
Learning score functions of a mixture of Gaussian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
C.2
Model Recovery of Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
D Conditional Diffusion Models
37
E
Stable Diffusion Models
38
F
Diffusion Model for Solving Inverse Problem
39
G Fine-tuning Diffusion Model
41
2

Figure 1: Visualization of generation samples from different diffusion models. We utilized de-
noising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) [1, 13], consistency model (CT) [14], U-ViT [15]
trained on CIFAR-10 [16] dataset. Samples in the corresponding row and column are generated
from the same initial noise with a deterministic ODE sampler.
1
Introduction
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a powerful new family of deep generative models
with remarkable performance in many applications, including image generation [1, 2, 3] , image-
to-image translation [4, 5, 6], text-to-image synthesis [3, 7, 8], and solving inverse problem [9, 10,
11, 12]. These models learn an unknown data distribution generated from the Gaussian noise dis-
tribution through a process that imitates the non-equilibrium thermodynamic diffusion process
[1, 2]. In the forward diffusion process, the noise is continuously injected into training samples;
while in the reverse diffusion process, a model is learned to remove the noise from noisy sam-
ples parametrized by a noise-predictor neural network. Then guided by the trained model, new
samples (e.g., images) from the target data distribution can be generated by transforming random
noise instances through step-by-step denoising following the reverse diffusion process. Despite the
remarkable data generation capabilities, the fundamental mechanisms driving their performance
are largely under-explored.
In this work, we study an intriguing while prevalent phenomenon that sets diffusion models
apart from most other generative models. We refer to this phenomenon as “consistent model repro-
ducibility”. More precisely, as illustrated in Figure 1, when different diffusion models are trained
on the same dataset, and sampled from the same noises when using a deterministic ODE sampler.1
Different diffusion models consistently converge to nearly identical image contents, which is
irrespective of network architectures, training and sampling procedures, and perturbation kernels.
This phenomenon implies that different diffusion models are learning nearly identical map-
1We employ a deterministic sampler to ensure model reproducibility, but stochastic samplers can also achieve repro-
ducibility when they generate consistent noise across different models.
3

(a) Reproducibilty
(b) Generalizability
Figure 2: “Memorization” and “Generalization” regimes for unconditional diffusion models.
We utilize DDPMv4 and train them on the CIFAR-10 dataset, adjusting both the model’s size and
the size of the training dataset. In terms of model size, we experiment with UNet-64, UNet-128, and
UNet-256, where, for instance, UNet-64 indicates a UNet structure with an embedding dimension
of 64. As for the dataset size, we select images from the CIFAR dataset, ranging from 26 to 215.
Under each dataset size, different models are trained from the same subset of images. The figure
on the left displays the reproducibility score as we compare various models across different dataset
sizes, while the figure on the right illustrates the generalizability score of the models as the dataset
size changes.
ping and distributions, as further discussed in Section 3. More interestingly, through studying the
reproducibility under different regimes of training data size, we further find that diffusion models
are learning different types of data distributions depending on the size of training data. As illus-
trated in Figure 2, this is corroborated by our findings that the consistent model reproducibility
emerges in two distinct regimes: (i) “Memorization regime”: the model has the capacity to mem-
orize the training data but no ability to generate new samples. The co-existence of reproducibility
and memorization implies that the diffusion model is learning the empirical multi-delta distribu-
tion of the training samples. (ii) “Generalization regime”: the model regains reproducibility while
it gains the ability to produce new data. The co-emergence of reproducibility and generalizability
indicates that the diffusion model is learning the underlying distribution of the data.
Summary of contributions.
In summary, we briefly highlight our contributions below:
• A comprehensive study of model reproducibility. We present the first comprehensive and
systematic study of the reproducibility in diffusion models. Our findings are consistent under
various network architectures, noise perturbation kernels, training and sampling settings.
• Two regimes of model reproducibility and distribution learning. Our analysis reveals that
reproducibility manifests in two regimes. We demonstrate that diffusion models learn different
4

types of distributions (i.e., empirical vs. underlying distribution) in different regimes.
• Model reproducibility beyond unconditional diffusion models. Under various different set-
tings, we show that reproducibility manifest in different but structured ways, including condi-
tional diffusion models, inverse problem solving, fine-tuning.
Theoretical and practical implications of our work.
Understanding model reproducibility within
diffusion models could carry significant implications for both theoretical and practical aspects.
Theoretically, understanding the question will shed light on how the mapping function between
the noise and data distributions is learned and constructed, and it will also offer profound under-
standing of how diffusion models are capable of learning the complicated image distribution from
a limited number of training samples. We discuss the theoretical aspects in more detail in Section 5.
In practical terms, gaining a deeper insight into model reproducibility could potentially lead to (1)
improved efficiency in training, (2) solutions for data privacy concerns in large-scale pre-trained
diffusion models, and (3) more interpretable and controllable data generation processes. We fur-
ther discuss the practical aspect in detail in Section 6.
Notations.
We denote scalar (function) as regular lower-case letters (e.g. st, f(t)), vectors (func-
tion) with bold lower-case letters (e.g. x, s(xt, t)). We use [N] to denote the set {1, 2, . . . , N}, P(·)
to denote the probability, E [·] to denote expectation, || · ||2 to denote L2 norm, N(·) to denote gaus-
sian distribution, U(0, 1) to denote uniform distribution from 0 to 1. Given any d ∈N, we use Id to
denote an identity matrix of size d.
Organization of the paper.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces and
Section 3 analyzes the reproducibility in the contexts of memorization and generalization regimes.
We then broaden our investigation to include variants of diffusion model settings in Section 4.
Section 5 draws comparisons between our work and related literature. Finally, in Section 6, we
explore the implications of our empirical findings.
2
Consistent Model Reproducibility
While the illustrations in Figure 1 and initial investigations in the seminal work [2] are motivating,
this work provides a more comprehensive and systematic study of model reproducibility in diffu-
sion models.2 We begin by proposing quantitative metrics to evaluate reproducibility as well as
generalizability in diffusion models. Subsequently, we discover a strong relationship between the
reproducibility and generalizability of diffusion models.
2Recent seminal work [2] has observed a similar phenomenon (see also subsequent works [14, 17]), but the study
in [2] remains preliminary.
5

2.1
Measures of Reproducibility and Generalizability
Measure of model reproducbility.
To study the reproducibility phenomenon in Figure 1 more
quantitatively, we introduce the reproducibility (RP) score to measure the similarity of image pair
generated from two different diffusion models starting from the same noise, which is drawn i.i.d.
from the standard Gaussian distribution:
RP Score := P (MSSCD(x1, x2) > 0.6) ,
which measures the probability of a generated sample pair (x1, x2) from two different diffusion
models to have self-supervised copy detection (SSCD) similarity MSSCD larger than 0.6 [18, 19].3
Higher RP score indicates stronger model reproducibility. In practice, we estimate RP Score by
the empirical probability using 10K noise samples. The SSCD similarity is first introduced in [18]
to measure the replication between image pair (x1, x2), which is defined as follows:
MSSCD(x1, x2) =
SSCD(x1) · SSCD(x2)
||SSCD(x1)||2 · ||SSCD(x2)||2
where SSCD(·) represents a neural descriptor for copy detection of images.
In addition, we also use the mean-absolute-error (MAE) score to measure the reproducibility,
MAE Score := P (MAE(x1, x2) < 15.0), based upon similar setting with the RP score. MAE(·) is
the operator that measures the mean absolute different of image pairs in the pixel value space ([0,
255]).
Measure of model generalizability.
Moreover, we discover a strong relationship between model
reproducibility and its generalizability, where the latter refers to the model’s ability to produce new
samples distinct from the ones in the training set. To assess the generalizability of diffusion models,
we introduce the generalization (GL) score as follows:
GL Score := 1 −P

max
i∈[N] [MSSCD(x, yi)] > 0.6

,
which is defined based upon the probability of maximum MSSCD over the training dataset larger
than 0.6. Similar to RP score, we empirically sample 10K initial noises to estimate the probability.
Intuitively, GL score measures the dissimilarity between the generated sample x and all N samples
yi from the training dataset {yi}N
i=1. Higher GL score indicates stronger generalizability.
2.2
Model Reproducibility Manifests in Two Regimes
Based upon RP and MAE scores, we provide comprehensive quantitative studies (see Figure 6) to
demonstrate the prevalence of model reproducibility in diffusion models. More interestingly, we
discover that the reproducibility of the model arises either through memorization of the training
data or by acquiring the ability to generalize. As highlighted in Figure 2, we show that
3As demonstrated in [19], MSSCD > 0.4 already exhibits very strong visual similarities.
6

The model reproducibility manifests in two distinct memorization and generalization regimes,
depending on the size of training data and model capacities.
In the following, we discuss the two regimes in detail:
• “Memorization regime” characterizes the scenario where the reproducibility is due to the mem-
orization of the training data distribution. As illustrated in the left region of Figure 2a, this
regime occurs when the model has much larger capacity than the size of training data. Al-
though the model possesses the ability to reproduce the same results starting from the same
noise, the generated samples are only replications of the samples in the training data and the
model lacks the ability to generate new samples; see the left region of Figure 2b. In this regime,
the emergence of reproducibility is due to the fact that all diffusion models memorize the same
multi-delta distribution of training samples. This can be verified by characterizing the closed-
form solution of the score function under empirical multi-delta distribution (see Proposition 1),
and by showing that practical diffusion models converge to such score function (see Figure 4).
An in-depth study is provided in Section 3.1. It should noted that, given no generalizability,
training diffusion models in this regime might hold limited practical interest.
• “Generalization regime” emerges when the diffusion model not only regains its reproducibil-
ity but also becomes capable of generating new samples distinct from the training data; see the
right region of Figure 2b. This usually happens when the diffusion model is trained on large
dataset without full capacity to memorize the whole dataset [20]; see the right region of Fig-
ure 2a. This is the regime in which diffusion models are commonly trained and employed in
practice. As illustrated in Figure 2b, we revealed that there is a clear phase transition from the
memorization regime to the generalization regime as the training samples increase. In the gen-
eralization regime, the model reproducbility co-emerges with the model’s generalizability. We
believe this is because all diffusion models are learning the same score function of the true under-
lying data distribution instead of the training data distribution. We provide an in-depth study
in Section 3.2.
2.3
Reproducibility is Rare in Generative Models
We end this section by highlighting that only diffusion models appear to consistently exhibit model
reproducibility. This property rarely exists in other generative models, with one exception as noted
in [25].4 Quantitative results of model reproducibility for Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
[26] and Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [27] are in Figure 3. In contrast to diffusion models, the
observed lack of reproducibility in GANs and VAEs implies that they are not effectively trained to
capture the underlying data distribution. This deficiency is a contributing factor to the occurrence
of mode collapse in GANs [28].
4[25] demonstrates that VAE is uniquely identifiable encoding given a factorized prior distribution over the latent
variables.
7

Figure 3: Quantitative results for GANS and VAEs. In our evaluation of GAN-based methods,
we utilize two architectures: Wasserstein GAN (wGAN) [21] and Spectral Normalization GAN
(SNGAN) [22] training on the CIFAR-10 dataset. For VAE-based approaches, we consider both the
standard VAE and the Variational Autoencoding Mutual Information Bottleneck (VAMP) model
[23] training on the MNIST [24] dataset.
3
Analyzing Reproducibility in Two Regimes
To understand why diffusion models exhibit reproducibility across different models and regimes, it
would be intuitive to first look at the reverse sampling process. When we employ an ODE sampler
[2], for t ∈[0, 1] the reverse sampling process can be characterized by
xt =
 1 −f(t′)

xt′ + g2(t′)
2
· s(xt′; t′)
score function
,
(1)
where t′ = t + ∆t ∈[0, 1], f(t) = d log st
dt
, and g2(t) = ds2
t σ2
t
dt
−2s2
t σ2
t
d log st
dt
. Here, the scalars
σt and st denote the parameters of the perturbation kernel pt(xt|x0) = N(xt; stx0, s2
t σ2
t I) at the
t-th time-step. Furthermore, let fs : E 7→I be the mapping from the noise space E to the image
space I, by using a deterministic ODE sampler and the score function s(xt; t). The reproducibility
of diffusion models is the result of the learned mapping fs is reproducible.
Observing (1), it becomes evident that the behavior of the ODE sampler is deterministic, with
results exclusively reliant on s(xt; t). This implies that the consistency observed across various
diffusion models might be attributed to the reproducibility in score matching. Hence, to under-
stand the reproducibility observed in both memorization and generalization regimes as outlined
in Section 2, we must delve into two critical questions:
• How well do diffusion models approximate the score function s(xt; t) in each regime?
• For each regime, which distribution p(x0) do diffusion models learn the score function s(xt; t) from?
In the following, we study both questions for the memorization and generalization regimes in
Section 3.1 and Section 3.2, respectively. Before that, we first derive the analytical form of any
given distribution p(x0) based upon the Tweedie’s formula [29] as follows.
8

Figure 4: Convergence of the optimal denoiser (left) and training loss (right) w.r.t. the train-
ing data size. We employ DDPMv4 and conduct training on the CIFAR-10 dataset. During this
process, we make modifications to both the model’s capacity and the size of the training dataset,
maintaining the same configuration as depicted in Figure 2. The left figure illustrates the repro-
ducibility score between each diffusion model and the theoretically unique identifiable encoding
as outlined in Proposition 1, the right figure illustrates the training loss for these models when
trained till converge.
Lemma 1. Suppose the distribution learned by diffusion model is p(x0) and the perturbation kernel pt(xt|x0) =
N(xt; stx0, s2
t σ2
t I) with perturbation parameters st, σt. The ideal score function has the following form
s(xt; t) =
1
s2
t σ2
t
 Ext∼pt(xt)[x0|xt] −xt

=
1
s2
t σ2
t
 
st
Ex0∼p(x0)[N(xt; stx0, s2
t σ2
t I) · x0]
Ex0∼p(x0)[N(xt; stx0, s2
t σ2
t I)]
−xt
!
.
In the following, we will use the above result to derive the optimal score function w.r.t. different
p(x0) in two distinct regimes.
3.1
Reproducibility in Memorization Regime
Through a combination of theoretical and experimental studies, we show that in the memorization
regime,
reproducibility is a result of memorizing the training distribution p(x0) = 1
N
PN
i=1 δ(x0 −yi).
Here, p(x0) denotes the multi-delta distribution of the training samples {yi}N
i=1 and δ(·) de-
notes the Dirac delta function. In the following, we corroborate our claim by (i) deriving the op-
timal score function of p(x0) in Proposition 1, and by (ii) showing that practical diffusion models
9

converge to the optimal score function in the small data regime; see Figure 4.
Proposition 1. Given a training dataset {yi}N
i=1 of N-samples, consider the same setting of Lemma 1
with p(x0) following the empirical multi-delta distribution p(x0) = 1
N
PN
i=1 δ(x0 −yi). In this set-
ting, we can show that the score function can be characterized as
semp(xt; t) = −
1
s2
t σ2
t
"
xt −st
PN
i=1 N(xt; styi, s2
t σ2
t I)yi
PN
i=1 N(xt; styi, s2
t σ2
t I)
#
.
The proof for Proposition 1 can be found in the Section B, building upon previous findings from
[17, 30]. From Proposition 1, we can see that the score function semp(xt; t) is purely determined
by the given training dataset {yi}N
i=1 and perturbation parameters st, σt.
Moreover, by comparing the reproducibility between the theoretical noise-to-image mapping
fsemp and different practically trained diffusion models, our experiments in Figure 4 (left) demon-
strate that the trained networks have a very high similarity compared with the theoretical solution
when the training data size is small enough. In the meanwhile, the training loss in Figure 4 (right)
also converges to the minimum value in this case, which is proven in Section B. As such, in the
memorization regime when the model has a much larger capacity than the training data, the repro-
ducibility among different diffusion models and the theoretical mapping implies that all diffusion
models are approximating the same score function of the empirical multi-delta distribution of the
training data. In this regime, the diffusion model lacks the ability to generate new samples.
3.2
Reproducibility in Generalization Regime
Second, we study reproducibility in the generalization regime, which is the typical training setting
for most practical diffusion models. Within this regime, we first focus on examining the learning
of score function through model reproducibility. Based upon preliminary studies using simple
models, we show that in the generalization regime,
reproducibility is a byproduct of diffusion model learning the ground-truth distribution p(x0).
Following this, we conduct a thorough investigation into the reproducibility of various pre-
trained diffusion models used in real-world applications.
3.2.1
Reproducibility & Distribution Learning
However, analysis of the estimation accuracy under the true natural image distribution is exceed-
ingly challenging. Instead, we illustrate through empirical evidence that diffusion models have the
capacity to learn the underlying distribution by utilizing data samples generated from two given
distributions: (i) a mixture of Gaussian distribution and (ii) pre-trained diffusion models.
10

Figure 5: Score matching accuracy. We train the same diffusion model with varying numbers of
training samples N and subspace dimension r from the Mixture of Gaussian distribution defined
in Equation (2) and plot the metric Lscore in different colors for each r. The detailed experimental
settings are in Section C.1.
Case 1: Learning score functions of a mixture of Gaussians.
We first consider learning diffusion
models based upon the following mixture of low-rank Gaussian (MoG) distribution:5
p(x0) = 1
C
X
i∈[C]
N (x0; 0, Σi) with Σi = UiU ⊤
i ,
(2)
where C is the number of classes, and U ∗
i ∈Rd×r is the low-rank basis for the ith class with r ≪d.
In this case, by invoking Lemma 1, we can show that the corresponding score function has the
following form.
Proposition 2. Under the same setting of Lemma 1 with p(x0) following the MoG distribution
introduced in (2), we can show that the optimal score function is:
sMoG(xt, t) =
X
i∈[C]
πi(xt, t)
s2
t σ2
t

−xt +
1
1 + σ2
t
UiU ⊤
i xt

,
with πi(xt, t) =
N
 xt; 0, s2
t UiU ⊤
i + s2
t σ2
t Id

P
i∈[C] N
 xt; 0, s2
t UiU ⊤
i + s2
t σ2
t Id
.
The proof can be found in Section B. To test whether practical diffusion models converge to
the optimal score function sMoG(xt, t), we train the diffusion models sθ by using N data points
{yi}N
i=1 ⊆Rn drawn from the MoG distribution in (2). We measure the distance between sMoG(xt, t)
and sθ by
Lscore := Et∼U(0,1),x0∼p(x0),xt∼pt(xt|x0)

∥sθ(xt, t) −sMoG(xt, t)∥2

,
where the expectation is calculated for t uniformly sampled from [0, 1], x0 sampled from the MoG
distribution p(x0) and xt sampled from the noise perturbation kernel pt(xt|x0) given t and x0.
5As shown in [31], the learned real data distribution could be approximated as the Mixture of Gaussian distribution.
11

From experiment results shown in Figure 5, we observe that sθ(xt, t) converges to sMoG(xt, t) as
N increases given different r. Therefore, under this setting of MoG distribution, the diffusion
model could converge towards the score function sMoG given enough training samples (in the
generalization regime).
Case 2: Learning score functions from pre-trained diffusion models.
Second, suppose the un-
derlying image distribution p(x0) can be characterized by the noise-to-image mapping fsθ1(ϵ), ϵ ∼
N(0, s2
t σ2
t Id) of a pretrained diffusion model in generalization regime sθ1. We sample N data
points from p(x0) to generate a training dataset {yi}N
i=1, based upon which we train another dif-
fusion model sθ2 with sufficient large N (in the generalization regime ). We then calculate the
reproducibility of the two models following the same metric as in Section 2.1.
Experimentally, we find that the two models have a high RP Score = 0.80, which indicates
that the diffusion model fsθ2 could converge to the underlying distribution, which is the same
data distribution as fsθ1, and at the same time they have the same noise-to-image mapping. The
detailed experiment settings are in Section C.2.
3.2.2
Prevalence of Reproducibility
Finally, we conclude this section by showing the prevalence of reproducibility in the generalization
regime, which is irrespective of network architectures, training and sampling procedures, and perturba-
tion kernels. Specifically, in Figure 6, we visualize the similarity matrix for seven different popular
diffusion models, where each element of the matrix measures pairwise similarities of two different
diffusion models based upon RP score (left) and MAE score (right). All the models are trained
with the CIFAR-10 dataset [16]. Experimental details and more comprehensive studies can be
found in Section A.
As we can see from Figure 6, there is a very consistent model reproducible phenomenon for
comparing any two models. For even the most dissimilar models, the RP and MAE scores are
notably high at 0.7 and 0.68, respectively. Specifically, we observe the following:
• Different network architectures. We evaluate (i) U-Net [32] based architecture: DDPM [1],
DDPM++ [2], Multistage [33], EDM [17], Consistency Training (CT) and Distillation (CD)
[14], and (ii) Transformer [34] based architecture: DiT [35] and U-ViT [15]. This phenomenon
remains consistent regardless of the specific architecture employed.
• Different training procedures. We consider discrete [1] and continuous [2] settings, training
from scratch or distillation [36, 14] for the diffusion model. When we compare CT (consistency
training) and EDMv1, even when we use different training losses, they both converge to similar
noise-to-image mappings. Additionally, comparing DDPMv1 and Progressivev1 reveals that
both training from scratch and distillation approaches lead to the same results.
• Different sampling procedures. For sampling, we only use deterministic samplers, such as DPM-
Solver [37], Heun-Solver [17], DDIM [13] etc. For example, DDPMv4 utilizes DPM-solver,
12

Figure 6: Similarity among different unconditional diffusion model settings in generalization
regime. We visualize the quantitative results based upon seven different unconditional diffusion
models (DDPMv4, DDPMv6 [1, 13], Multistagev1 [33], EDMv1 [17], UViT [15], CT [14], Progres-
sivev1 [36]) based upon reproducibility score (left) and MAE score (right) (defined in Section 2.1).
About more detailed settings and a more comprehensive comparison could be found in Section A.
EDMv1 employs a 2nd order heun-solver, and CT utilizes consistency sampling, yet they all
exhibit very high model reproducibility.
• Different perturbation kernels. For the data corruption process, we compared Variance Pre-
serving (VP) [1], Variance Exploding (VE), and sub Variance Preserving (sub-VP) [2] pertur-
bation methods for noise perturbation stochastic differential equations. We scale the initial noise
using the standard deviation specific to the terminated Gaussian distribution of each perturba-
tion kernel to ensure a fair comparison, details can be found in Section A. Our observations
indicate that the choice of perturbation methods (VP, sub-VP, and VE) has a limited impact on
reproducibility when comparing DDPMv4, DDPMv6, and EDMv1.
3.2.3
Reproducibility from Noise Hyperplane to Image Manifold
While Section 3.2.2 studies the reproducibility of images generated from discretized initial noises
ϵ ∈E. In this section, we want to further explore the reproducibility of the image manifold gener-
ated from 2D noise hyperplane H ⊆E. Specifically, we find that
• Similar unique encoding maps across different network architectures. We further confirm the model
reproducibility by visualizing the generated image manifold from the same 2D noise hyper-
plane, inspired by [38]. The visualization in Figure 7 shows that different generated manifolds
of different network architectures share very similar structures.
13

Figure 7: Unqiue Encoding from Noise Hyperplane to Image Manifold. The diagram illustrates
the process of mapping from a noise hyperplane to the image manifold. We employ three dis-
tinct models: DDPMv6, EDMv1, and Multistagev1. Initially, we select three different initial noises
from Gaussion and generate corresponding samples, denoted by a triangle, square, and circle in
the first three images on the left. The hyperplane is defined based on these chosen noises. Image
generations, starting from uniformly selected initial noise within this hyperplane, are classified as
identical to either the triangle, square, or circle image, determined by the maximum SSCD simi-
larity with them. Each initial noise is colored according to its generation’s corresponding class (as
indicated on the right; for instance, the noise’s generation identical to the triangle image is repre-
sented by the black-white color bar), along with the SSCD similarity to the identical image.
• Local Lipschitzness of the unique encoding from noise to image space. Furthermore, our visualization
suggests that fs is locally Lipschitz, where ∥fs(ϵ1) −fs(ϵ2)∥≤L∥ϵ1 −ϵ2∥for any ϵ1, ϵ2 ∈
B(ϵ, δϵ) ∩E with some Lipschitz constant L. Here B(ϵ, δϵ) denotes a ball centered at a Gaussian
noise ϵ with radius δϵ. In other words, noises ϵ1, ϵ2 ∈E close in distance would generate similar
reproducible images in I via diffusion models.
Specifically, the visualization in Figure 7 is created as follows. First, we pick three initial noises
(ϵ1, ϵ2, ϵ3) in the noise space E and used different diffusion model architectures to generate clear
images (x1, x2, x3) in the image manifold I, so that the images {xi}3
i=1 belong to three different
classes. Second, we create a 2D noise hyperplane with
ϵ (α, β) = α · (ϵ2 −ϵ1) + β · (ϵ3 −ϵ1) + ϵ1
Within the region (α, β) ∈[−0.1, 1.1]×[−0.1, 1, 1], we uniformly sample 100 points along each axis
and generate images x (α, β) for each sample ϵ (α, β) using different diffusion model architectures
(i.e., DDPMv6, EDMv1, Multistagev1). For each point (α, β), it is considered as identical to image
xi for i = arg maxk∈{1,2,3}[MSSCD(xk, x (α, β))], and we visualize the value of MSSCD(xi, x (α, β)).
As we observe from Figure 7, the visualization shares very similar structures across different net-
work architectures. Second, for each plot, closeby noises create images with very high similarities.
These observations support our above claims.
14

Figure 8: Model reproducibility for conditional diffusion model in the generalization regime.
In this study, we employ conditional diffusion models, specifically U-Net-based (EDM-cond,
MultistageEDM-cond) and transformer based (UViT-cond), which we train on the CIFAR-10
dataset using class labels as conditions. Additionally, we select unconditional diffusion models,
namely Progressivev1, DDPMv4, and EDMv2, as introduced in Section 3.2.2. Figure (a) showcases
sample generations from both unconditional and conditional diffusion models (with the "plane"
serving as the condition for the latter). Notably, samples within the same row and column originate
from the same initial noise. The reproducibility scores between the conditional diffusion models
are presented in (b), and between unconditional and conditional diffusion models in (c).
4
Beyond Unconditional Diffusion Models
In this section, we explore the concept of model reproducibility in a broader context, extending
beyond unconditional diffusion models. We demonstrate that model reproducibility manifests
more generally across various scenarios, including conditional diffusion models, diffusion models
for inverse problems, and the fine-tuning of diffusion models.
4.1
Conditional Diffusion Models
Conditional diffusion model, introduced by [41, 39], gained its popularity in many applications
such as text-to-image generation [3, 7, 8]. These models achieve a superior degree of control and
enhanced quality in output generation through the integration of rich class embeddings within the
denoising function. Interestingly, we find that:
Model reproducibility of conditional models exhibits in a structured way and is strongly related to
unconditional counterparts.
Specifically, our experiments in Figure 8 demonstrate that (i) model reproducibility exists among
different conditional diffusion models, and (ii) model reproducibility presents between condi-
tional and unconditional diffusion models only if the type (or class) of content generated by the
15

(a) Visualization.
(b) RPcond Score
Figure 9: Model reproducibility for conditional diffusion model generations on ImageNet
dataset. In this experiment, we choose the conditional diffusion model (EDM, ADM [39], CD,
CT, iDDPM [40]) trained on the ImageNet dataset. 10K image pairs are generated to estimate the
RPcond Score. Due to the complexity of the ImageNet dataset, we set the threshold for the SSCD
metric as 0.4 instead of 0.6 here, following the setting in [19].
unconditional models matches that of the conditional models. More results can be found in Sec-
tion D.
To support our claims, we define the conditional reproducibility score between different condi-
tional diffusion models by RPcond Score := P (MSSCD(xc
1, xc
2) > 0.6 | c ∈C) to evaluate similarity
between outputs of different conditional diffusion models, based on the likelihood of their similar-
ity exceeding a threshold from the same initial noise and conditioned on the class c ∈C. We also
introduce a between reproducibility score RPbetween Score := P
 maxc∈C[MSSCD(x1, xc
2)] > 0.6

, for
an unconditional generation x1 and conditional generation xc
2 originating from an identical noise,
to assess the similarity between unconditional output x1 and conditional output xc
2.
Results in Figure 8 (a) (b) show that samples from different conditional models (EDM-cond,
UViT-cond, MultistageEDM-cond) are similar when conditioned on the same class and noise, sup-
porting Claim (i). On the other hand, a high RPbetween Score and visual similarities between un-
conditional and conditional samples, as seen Figure 8 (c), support Claim (ii). Furthermore, beside
the CIFAR-10 dataset, we also demonstrate the conditional reproducibility on large-scale datasets
such as ImageNet [42] in Figure 9 and large-scale diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion [3] in
Section E.
4.2
Diffusion Models for Solving Inverse Problems
Recently, diffusion models have also been demonstrated as rich, structural priors to solve a broad
spectrum of inverse problems [12, 11, 43, 9],6 including but not limited to image super-resolution,
6Here, the problem is often to reconstruct an unknown signal u from the measurements z of the form z = A(u)+η,
where A denotes some (given) sensing operator and η is the noise.
16

Figure 10: Model reproducibility for solving inverse problems in the generalization regime.
In this investigation, we employ various unconditional diffusion models, as introduced in Sec-
tion 3.2.2, which were initially trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Our approach involves utilizing
a modified deterministic variant of diffusion posterior sampling (DPS), as detailed in Section F.
Specifically, we focus on the task of image inpainting. Figure (a) presents both the observation z,
unknown signal u, and generations from different diffusion models. Notably, samples within the
same row and column originate from the same initial noise. The reproducibility scores for different
diffusion models under the DPS algorithm are quantitatively analyzed in (b).
de-blurring, and inpainting. Motivated by these promising results, our illustration is based upon
solving the image inpainting problem using a modified deterministic variant of diffusion posterior
sampling (DPS) [11], showcasing that for solving inverse problems using diffusion models:
Model reproducibility holds only within the same type of network architectures.
Our claim is supported by the experimental results in Figure 10. Specifically, Figure 10 (a)
virtualizes the samples generated from different diffusion models, and Figure 10 (b) presents the
similarity matrix of model reproducibility between different models, i.e., U-Net based (DDPMv1,
DDPMv2, DDPMv3, DDPMv4, Multistagev1) and Transformer based (DiT, U-ViT) architectures.
We note a strong degree of model reproducibility among architectures of the same type (e.g., U-Net
vs. Transformer), but the model reproducibility score exhibits a notable decrease when any U-Net
model is compared with any Transformer-based model.
We conjecture that the lack of reproducibility across network architectures is due to the follow-
ing reasons: (i) DPS introduces the gradient term ∂sθ(xt,t)
∂xt
during the sampling, and this extra term
might break the reproducibility for different type of architectures. (ii) the reproducibility between
different types of architectures might not hold for out-of-distribution data generation, whereas the
data xt passed into the learned score function sθ(xt, t) is out-of-distribution for solving inverse
17

Figure 11: Model reproducibility for diffusion model finetuing. In this experiment, we employ
DDPMv4. Two distinct training strategies are investigated: "from scratch," denoting direct training
on a subset of the CIFAR-10 dataset, and "partial fine-tuning," which involves pretraining on the
entire CIFAR-100 dataset [16] followed by fine-tuning only the attention layers of the model on a
subset of the CIFAR-10 dataset. The dataset sizes for CIFAR-10 range from 26 to 215. Importantly,
both "from scratch" and "partial fine-tuning" are trained using the same subset of images for each
dataset size. Under different dataset sieze, Figure (a) illustrates the reproducibility score between
these two strategies and (b) presents the generalization score for them.
problems. We leave these for future study.
4.3
Model Reproducibility in Fine-tuning Diffusion Models.
Few-shot image fine-tuning for diffusion models, as discussed in [44, 45, 46, 47], showcases remark-
able generalizability. This is often achieved by fine-tuning a small portion of the parameters of a
large-scale pre-trained (text-to-image) diffusion model. In this final study, we delve into the im-
pacts of partial model fine-tuning on both model reproducibility and generalizability, by extending
our analysis in Section 2. We show that:
Partial fine-tuning reduces reproducibility but improves generalizability in “memorization regime”.
Our claim is supported our results in Figure 11, comparing model fine-tuning and training from
scratch of with varying size of the training data, where both models have the same number of pa-
rameters. In comparison to training from scratch that we studied in Figure 2b, fine-tuning specific
components of pre-trained diffusion models, particularly the attention layer in the U-Net architec-
ture, yields lower model reproducibility score but higher generalization score in the memorization
regime. However, in the generalization regime, partial model fine-tuning has a minor impact on
both reproducibility and generalization in the diffusion model. Our result reconfirms the improved
18

generalizability of fine-tuning diffusion models on limited data, but shows a surprising tradeoff in
terms of model reproducibility that is worth of further investigations.
5
Related Works
Convergence analysis of diffusion models.
Numerous theoretical studies have investigated the
diffusion model’s convergence towards the underlying distribution. Most of these studies, includ-
ing [48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53], have established convergence by assuming an L2-accurate score estima-
tion. Others have explored convergence without relying on this assumption. Nonetheless, these
studies rely on strong simplification regarding network architectures [54, 55] and data distribu-
tions [55]. Our paper provides an empirical complement to existing theoretical analyses.
In contrast, our paper focuses on the learned distribution and score function under various
practical diffusion model settings. The empirical findings not only broaden the understanding of
diffusion models in realistic settings but also bridge the gap between theory and practice.
Understanding memorization & generalization.
Recently, Yoon et al. [20] categorized the train-
ing regimes of diffusion models into memorization and generalization, concluding that diffusion
models tend to generalize when they fail to memorize the training data. In the memorization
regime, Yi et al. [30], Gu et al. [56] demonstrated that training diffusion models converges towards
an optimal denoiser. In contrast, in the generalization regime, Pidstrigach [57] linked generaliza-
tion in simple settings to avoiding overfitting, while Kadkhodaie et al. [58] showed that the gen-
eralization capabilities of diffusion models arise from an implicit bias towards geometry-adaptive
harmonic bases. Furthermore, Somepalli et al. [59, 19], Carlini et al. [60] revealed that diffusion
models can still replicate training samples even in the generalization regime, leading to significant
privacy concerns.
In comparison, our work takes a step further to delve into the problem. By examining the
largely overlooked reproducibility phenomenon, our work is the first to show that diffusion mod-
els learn distinct distributions in different regimes: in the memorization regime, diffusion models
learn the empirical distribution, while in the generalization regime, they learn the underlying dis-
tribution. Moreover, our research provides the first empirical evidence that diffusion models can
overcome the curse of dimensionality when learning the underlying distribution, enabling effective
generalization even with a limited number of training samples. Finally, our analysis also extends
to conditional diffusion models and diffusion models for inverse problems, which have not been
addressed in previous studies.
Reproducibility in deep learning.
Theoretically, the reproducibility we identified for diffusion
models is similar to the notion of unique identifiable encoding, that several prior studies have ex-
plored for deep latent-variable models. This property refers to the ability of models to converge
to a specific input-embedding mapping, irrespective of variations in weight initialization or opti-
mization methods [61]. The foundational work for this property in deep latent-variable models
19

was established through the analysis of Independent Component Analysis (ICA) by [62, 63, 64].
Building upon this, [25] demonstrated the identifiability of Variational Autoencoders (VAE) using
conditionally factorial priors over latent variables, while [61] provided evidence of linear identifi-
ability in representation learning. Empirically, studies such as [65] and [38] have observed repro-
ducibility in representation learning and classification tasks, respectively, using similar network
architectures but different training procedures.
While [2] mentioned that diffusion models possess the property of unique identifiable encod-
ing, our novel empirical findings show that diffusion models consistently converge to a similar
noise-to-image mapping. This occurs regardless of variations in network architectures, noise per-
turbation kernels, or training and sampling procedures.
6
Conclusions and Implications
This study focuses on an important phenomenon in diffusion models, which we term “consistent
model reproducibility”. We believe this intriguing phenomenon could significantly impact future
research on diffusion models. Below, we outline several promising directions:
Improving training efficiency.
The potential of this work to improve the training efficiency of
diffusion models lies in leveraging the distinct relationship between noise and image spaces. Re-
cent research [33] illustrates this by delineating the training of diffusion models into three stages,
each employing networks of varying sizes. This approach capitalizes on the reproducibility phe-
nomenon, indicating that adequately parameterized networks learn the same score function. Con-
sequently, by appropriately adjusting parameter sizes for each stage, empirical evidence shows that
the proposed method surpasses existing techniques, particularly in improving training efficiency
in the generalization regime. These findings imply that incorporating reproducibility as a guiding
principle in training diffusion models holds significant promise for future research endeavors.
Black-box model privacy.
Several commercial, large-scale diffusion models, e.g. Imagen [66],
DALL-E [67], are designed as black-box systems, raising significant privacy concerns due to the
property of reproducibility. Our analysis, in the Case 2 of Section 3.2.1, indicates that one can
replicate the mapping from a trained diffusion model fsθ by training a new score function sθ′
from generated data by fsθ (through the open-source API). Furthermore, given the white-box
duplication fsθ′, gradient-based adversarial attacking [68] and training data privacy [60] would
arise as more exacerbated problems.
Controllable data generation.
Given the unique mapping learned by the diffusion model, we
could control image distribution by manipulating the noise distribution. More specifically, in text-
driven image generation, image distribution could be manipulated for adversarial attacking [69],
robust defending [70], copyright protection [19, 59]. In solving inverse problems, one recent paper
20
