arXiv:2505.23721v2  [cs.LG]  3 Jun 2025
DiffER: Categorical Diffusion Models for
Chemical Retrosynthesis
Sean Current1*, Ziqi Chen1, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum2,
Xia Ning1,2,3,4, Srinivasan Parthasarathy1*
1Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, 43210, OH, USA.
2College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210,
OH, USA.
3Translational Data Analytics Institute, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, 43210, OH, USA.
4Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210,
OH, USA.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): current.33@osu.edu;
srini@cse.ohio-state.edu;
Contributing authors: chen.8484@osu.edu; adu-ampratwum.1@osu.edu;
ning.104@osu.edu;
Abstract
Methods for automatic chemical retrosynthesis have found recent success through
the application of models traditionally built for natural language processing, pri-
marily through transformer neural networks. These models have demonstrated
significant ability to translate between the SMILES encodings of chemical prod-
ucts and reactants, but are constrained as a result of their autoregressive nature.
We propose DiffER, an alternative template-free method for retrosynthesis pre-
diction in the form of categorical diffusion, which allows the entire output
SMILES sequence to be predicted in unison. We construct an ensemble of diffu-
sion models which achieves state-of-the-art performance for top-1 accuracy and
competitive performance for top-3, top-5, and top-10 accuracy among template-
free methods. We prove that DiffER is a strong baseline for a new class of
template-free model and is capable of learning a variety of synthetic techniques
used in laboratory settings. Scientific Contribution. DiffER represents a novel
template-free technique for single-step retrosynthesis prediction which is able to
outperform a variety of other template-free methods on top-k accuracy metrics.
1

By constructing an ensemble of categorical diffusion models with a novel length
prediction component with variance, our method is able to approximately sam-
ple from the posterior distribution of reactants, producing results with strong
metrics of confidence and likelihood. Furthermore, our analyses demonstrate that
accurate prediction of the SMILES sequence length is key to further boosting the
performance of categorical diffusion models.
Retrosynthesis prediction is a vital step in organic synthesis tasks, particularly those
posed for drug discovery or drug engineering. In forward synthesis prediction, the
products of a chemical reaction are predicted from known reactants; retrosynthesis
prediction reverses this process, instead predicting possible reactants that would pro-
duce a target product. Repeated application of retrosynthesis prediction can help
chemists construct synthetic pathways for drug targets [1–3], promoting the discov-
ery and advancement of new pharmaceuticals. While numerous types of models for
computer-aided retrosynthesis have been proposed, many modern approaches utilize
data-driven machine learning to find suitable models for retrosynthesis prediction.
Recent advances in machine learning models for chemical retrosynthesis have taken
advantage of transformer architectures originally crafted for natural language tasks.
Instead of operating on natural language, these models are set to operate on SMILES
[4] encodings of chemical products and reactants, effectively translating between two
molecular sets [5]. Indeed, recent work has done precisely this, going as far as using
neural machine translation models originally built for language tasks for retrosynthesis
prediction [6, 7]. A more detailed overview of current work in single-step retrosyn-
thesis is provided in 2. While these models exhibit remarkable performance compared
to other baseline methods for retrosynthesis, they impose autoregressive constraints
during training and prediction, enforcing sequential decoding of the SMILES string.
In this work, we offer DiffER, an alternative to sequential decoding of SMILES
strings in the prediction process by utilizing categorical diffusion models rather than
autoregressive models. This exchange allows DiffER to decode the entire SMILES
string in unison, rather than in an autoregresssive manner. We hypothesize that
by allowing the model to predict the entire SMILES string in unison, it may bet-
ter learn structural relationships within the molecule. Additionally, diffusion models
have experienced a recent surge of success for many generation tasks across domains.
By employing categorical diffusion for the chemical retrosynthesis task, we provide a
strong and competitive baseline for a new class of model. An outline of our approach
is display in Figure 1, while a more detailed overview is available in Section 1. DiffER
achieves state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy and competitive performance for top-3, top-5,
and top-10 accuracy among template-free methods.
Our main contributions to the domain of computer-aided chemical retrosynthesis
are as follows:
• We develop and test DiffER, an ensemble of diffusion models for the chemical ret-
rosynthesis task and compare our performance against a variety of existing methods,
achieving state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy and competitive top-3 and top-5 accuracy.
2

Fig. 1 Schematic of DiffER, our diffusion process for retrosynthesis. a) The Product Encoder, which
converts the product to a random, root-aligned SMILES form and encodes it using the encoder
portion of the DiffER models. The encoder models also predict the size of the diffusion noise vector.
b) The Reactant Decoder, which diffuses the reactant from randomly initialized categorical noise
using the decoder portion of the DiffER models. Decoder models can predict pad tokens <P> to
diffuse SMILES strings of varying lengths. c) The Canonicalized Ranking, which ranks the canonical
molecules predicted by the DiffER models by the number of times they are generated. The top-ranked
reactant is the predicted reactant.
• We implement a novel method for estimating the length of the output sequence
prior to prediction so that the diffusion process can be properly initialized, while
accounting for possible error and variance in the predicted sequence length.
• We compare against a diffusion model with oracle length prediction to demonstrate
an experimental upper-limit of the diffusion approach if the output sequence length
is able to be perfectly estimated. We find that the oracle model greatly outperforms
all existing methods for computer-aided retrosynthesis, demonstrating the viability
of diffusion models for this task given a target sequence length.
• We also include results for a baseline diffusion model with length prediction which
does not account for variance or error in the output length, and show that our
training and sampling methodology greatly improves the performance of diffusion
models.
• We demonstrate the results of our method on a set of four reactions, highlighting
the benefits of our approach as well as the limitations for each reaction.
• We discuss the current advantages and limitations of our diffusion approach and
identify directions of future research to improve upon our work.
3

1 Methods
We define the retrosynthesis task as a sequence-to-sequence modeling problem and
combine the approaches of Hoogeboom et al. [8], DiffuSeq [9, 10], and MaskPredict
[11] to train conditional, multinomial diffusion models for the retrosynthesis task. We
utilize a traditional encoder-decoder transformer architecture to construct individual
conditional diffusion models, where the encoder is responsible for learning the represen-
tation of the conditional features and the decoder acts as the diffusion approximation
model. In the end, eight individual diffusion models are ensembled to produce DiffER,
a novel ensemble model for chemical retrosynthesis.
Let xt ∈{0, 1}K×ℓx be a sequence of ℓx one-hot encoded vectors of size K rep-
resenting the source and let yt ∈{0, 1}K×ℓy be similarly defined representing the
target. Let C denote a categorical probability distribution with parametrized proba-
bility. Finally, let F represent a transformer neural network with encoder Fencoder,
decoder Fdecoder, and sequence length prediction classifier Flength.
1.1 Forward Noising Process
Following Hoogeboom et al. [8], we define the multinomial diffusion process q as a
categorical distribution C with probability βt of sampling uniformly from {0, 1}K for
any step in the sequence, and apply noising to the target matrix yt:
q(yt|yt−1) = C(yt|(1 −βt)yt−1 + βt/K).
(1)
This forms a Markov chain allowing yt to be directly sampled from y0:
q(yt|y0) = C(yt|¯αty0 + (1 −¯αt)/K),
(2)
where αt = 1 −βt and ¯αt = Qt
τ=1 ατ. Note that in the forward noising process, we
only apply noise to the target sequence y0.
1.2 Conditional Denoising
We continue following the work of Hoogeboom et al. to denoise the categorical data.
We construct the posterior distribution of the categorical model as
pθ(yt−1|yt, y0) = C(yt−1|θpost(yt, y0)),
(3)
where
θpost(yt, y0) = ¯θ/
K
X
k=1
ˆθk
(4)
and
¯θ = [αtyt + (1 −αt)/K] ⊙[ˆαt−1y0 + (1 −ˆαt−1)/K].
(5)
Notably, as y0 is not known during inference, it must be estimated using a neural
network. Inspired by DiffuSeq [9, 10], we concatenate a representation of the source
sequence to the noised representation of the target sequence to use as input to the y0
4

approximation model. In contrast to DiffuSeq, which uses the embedded representation
of the source sequence x0, we process the source sequence with a transformer encoder
model prior to concatenating, which is used as the memory component in the decoder
architecture [12]. Thus, the reverse diffusion process is fully modeled as
pθ(yt−1|yt, x0) = C(yt−1|θpost(yt, Fdecoder(yt||Fencoder(x0)))),
(6)
where || is the concatenation operator. We denote the estimated target sequence as
ˆy0. Additionally, we add a sinusoidal embedding of the current diffusion timestep t to
the diffusion model input yt.
1.3 Length Prediction
One downside of the diffusion methodology compared to normal autoregressive meth-
ods is the requirement that the total length of the sequence must be known prior
to inference so that the starting uniform noise distribution can be properly initial-
ized. Prior work, such as DiffuSeq [9, 10], have primarily approached this issue by
padding the sequence with observable PAD tokens up to a maximum length, and allow-
ing the diffusion model to predict the location of PAD tokens as necessary. In contrast,
MaskPredict [11] presents the idea of a length prediction token, which is learnt by the
transformer encoder block and used to initialize the input to the transformer decoder.
We similarly prepend a LENGTH token to the source sequence x0 and use the learned
representation of the LENGTH token for the sequence to predict a target length ˆℓy:
p(ˆℓy|x0) = Flength(Fencoder(x0)),
(7)
where Flength is a feed-forward classifier function over integers up to the maximum
sequence length dependent only on the first column of Fencoder(x0).
Upon initial testing, we find that the baseline implementation of MaskPredict
length prediction performs poorly for this task due to its rigidity in predicting the
sequence length and frequency of predicting shorter sequences than the ground truth.
To remedy this, we propose a novel adjustment to the method by appending a uniform
random number n ∼U(1, N) of observable padding tokens to the decoder sequences
during training. This increases the expected length of the sequence by (1+N)
2
while
allowing the diffusion model to predict pad tokens within a range of the the target
length. Notably, as the probability of predicting n padding tokens is equivalent for
n ∈[1, N], the probability of predicting sequences with lengths within (1+N)
2
of the
predicted length is approximately equal. This offers benefits of both the MaskPredict
and DiffuSeq approaches: The diffusion model is provided with information about the
target length from the encoder while still allowing for the possibility of predicting a
variety of sequence lengths rather than only the predicted target length. Intuitively,
lower limits of N place more focus on the length prediction component, while higher
values of N allow the model to vary more from the initial length prediction. Addi-
tionally, as the lengths of the input source sequence and output target sequence of
the retrosynthesis task are highly correlated, we shift the methodology to predict the
5

difference in length between the source and target rather than the total length of the
target.
1.4 Ensemble Voting of Models
In order to stabilize and diversify the output of the diffusion model, we implement
an ensemble of various individual diffusion models with different values of the ran-
dom padding limit N. During inference, multiple samples are drawn from each model
trained on different N. Outputs are then ranked according to the number of times
they are sampled overall. Ties are broken using a ranked-choice voting scheme. This
process encourages output diversity by combining models trained with varying degrees
of reliance on the length prediction component. We refer to the constructed ensemble
model as DiffER.
We identically construct and train the individual models that compose DiffER,
varying only the maximum number of random padding that can be added on to the
target sequence during training. We test various voting combinations of models with
random padding limit N ∈{5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90}. We find that models
trained with N < 20 perform poorly, as they place too much focus on the length
prediction component, which is biased toward a lower increase in length. We construct
the final ensemble using eight models trained on N ∈{20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90}.
1.5 Loss Functions
We utilize a combination of mean square error (MSE) and variational lower bound
(VLB) losses to train the diffusion models, the latter of which is derived using the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence according to Hoogeboom et al [8]. We apply MSE
loss directly to the predicted target y0, while the VLB loss uses the sampled posterior
of the predicted target:
LMSE = E

||y2
0 −ˆy2
0||

(8)
LVLB = E
" K
X
k=0
y0,k log ˆy0,k −
T
X
t=2
KL(q(yt−1|yt, y0)|q(yt−1|yt, ˆy0))
#
.
(9)
Finally, we include a loss term for the length prediction task using cross entropy:
Lℓ= E
" L
X
l=0
ℓyl log p( ˆℓy|x0)l
#
,
(10)
where ℓy is a one-hot encoded vector representing the length difference between y0 and
x0. Additionally, when training the diffusion models, we employ the importance-based
time sampling algorithm used in DiffuSeq [9, 10].
6

1.6 Reproducibility
We apply our models to the USPTO-50K [13] data set with Root-aligned SMILES
augmentation [6], which greatly improves the performance of the diffusion mod-
els. We directly utilize the dataset splits provided by the authors of Root-aligned
SMILES. We form DiffER as an ensemble of models with random padding limit
N ∈{20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90}. Each model takes the form of a encoder-decoder
transformer architecture with 6 layers and 8 attention heads with hidden dimension
size 512, feed-forward size 2048, and GELU activation [14]. We utilize an Adam opti-
mizer with learning rate 1 × 10−4 and dropout rate of 0.1. We set the number of
diffusion steps to T = 200. We use a cosine beta schedule [15] and a Gumbel-softmax
distribution for noise sampling during the diffusion process.
During inference, we follow the work of Zhong et al. [6] to augment the input
SMILES strings. 20 random Root-aligned SMILES strings are generated for each input
product and provided to DiffER for sampling. Thus, each model in DiffER outputs
20 random samples for the input string. Output samples are canonized and ranked
according to rate of occurrence.
2 Related Work
2.1 Retrosynthesis Models
Early models for retrosynthesis were primarily rule-based, utilizing known scientific
knowledge and synthetic reactions to construct algorithms to find retrosynthetic path-
ways [16–18]. Over time, these rule-based algorithms gave way to more data-driven
approaches, which instead learn models based on known reactions and are more
efficient when the number of reaction types is higher. Data-driven models include
template-based, semi-template, and template-free generative models. In template-
based approaches, models match features of a target product molecule to known
reaction mechanisms in order to rank possible reactants [1, 19], while semi-template
methods first predict reaction centers and then complete the resulting synthons
(incomplete molecules) to form possible reactants [20, 21]. In contrast, template-free
generative models learn to construct new reactants, commonly using transformers
[6, 7, 22] or Graph Neural Networks [22, 23]. Here, generative models are sometimes
considered to have the advantage, as they are better able to generalize to reactions
that may exist outside the set of reaction templates, at the cost of losing scientific
interpretability and trust.
Early template-free models took advantage of sequential models commonly used in
natural language modeling. Liu et al. [5] implement a sequence-to-sequence recurrent
encoder-decoder model for retrosynthesis which operates on the SMILES [4] encod-
ings of molecules, and demonstrate model efficacy on-par with rule-based mechanisms
for retrosynthesis. In contrast to Liu et al.’s end-to-end approach, Segler et al. [1]
adopt a neuro-symbolic approach, combining rule-based mechanisms with neural net-
works designed to predict which rules should be applied for the retrosynthesis. More
recent approaches leverage further advances in natural language processing, directly
7

using transformer architectures and training styles that have performed well in natural
language and translation tasks.
Irwin et al. introduce Chemformer [7], a transformer architecture similar to that
of BART [12], a widely-used transformer in NLP for both sequence-to-sequence and
discriminative learning tasks. Chemformer is pretrained in a self-supervised manner on
SMILES strings for feature extraction, and then later applied to downstream tasks such
as forward synthesis, property prediction, and retrosynthesis. Tu et al. [22] leverage
the permutation-invariance of graph neural network encoders to constuct a graph-to-
sequence model, utilizing additional chemical features extracted by RDKit [24]. Once
the encoded representation of the graph is obtained, it is passed to a decoder model
[12] in order to produce a sequential SMILES output. Finally, Zhong et al. [6] modify
the mechanisms by which SMILES strings are constructed for molecules in order to
better represent relationships between products and reactants before they are passed to
neural machine translation models. Their root-aligned SMILES methodology is able to
significantly improve upon state-of-the-art baselines while applying only pre-existing
language models.
An important aspect of recent works which focus on encoding and decoding
SMILES representations of molecules is the transformer architecture. Proposed in 2017
for natural language tasks [25], transformer architectures are highly efficient, offering
good parallelization while achieving strong performance on sequential input. Recent
analysis of transformers have compared their inner workings favorably to graph learn-
ing algorithms [26], offering some insight as to why they are able to perform strongly
on chemistry-related tasks when applied to SMILES strings.
However, one downside of encoder-decoder transformer models lies in their auto-
regressive nature. When predicting SMILES outputs, transformer models are generally
required to do so token-by-token, re-using previous outputs as the input for the next
prediction in the sequence. This requires a significant amount of planning on the part of
the transformer, which is unable to amend previous predictions when prediction later
parts of the sequence. Additionally, chemical molecules are most often non-sequential
themselves, often containing both ring structures and branches. Thus, we hypothesize
that methods which decode the entire sequence at once rather than token-by-token
may achieve greater success when it comes to predicting molecules.
2.2 Categorical Diffusion Models
Diffusion models are a class of generative model that produce high quality results
from uniform random noise. In the forward pass, random noise is iteratively added to
a target sample over T steps until the sample is indistinguishable from random noise.
In the backward pass, the model is trained to iteratively de-noise the random sample
until the target sample is reconstructed [27–29]. Additionally, conditional diffusion
models [30–32] allow for the inclusion of conditional constraints and properties during
the de-noising process (often in the form of textual information), helping guide the
model toward a target output with specific parameters or properties.
Traditional diffusion models operate over continuous regimes such as image gen-
eration [27, 28], hindering their application on discrete problems such as language
or molecular generation tasks. To extend these models to discrete domains, many
8

adaptations have been proposed, such as multinomial diffusion [8] and DiffuSeq
[9, 10]. DiffuSeq adapts conditional diffusion models for the task of dialogue gen-
eration by employing traditional diffusion within the token embedding space. The
authors concatenate embedded representations of the target embeddings and the
source embeddings, which act as the conditional. Gaussian noise is then applied to
the portion of the sample containing the target embeddings, and the source embed-
dings are left untouched during the diffusion process. Yuan et al. [33] follow the
work of DiffuSeq, but utilize alternative network architectures and support adaptive
noise scheduling. Dieleman et al. [34] similarly add noise after input embeddings are
applied, and jointly learn both the diffusion and embedding model. In contrast, the
multinomial diffusion proposed by Hoogeboom et al. [8] applies noising in the discrete
domain, repeatedly sampling from a categorical distribution conditioned on the cur-
rent diffusion timestep and the current sample. This approach is similarly employed
by Austin et al. [35] and DiffusionBERT [36]. Austin et al. liken the noise-adding
approach of traditional diffusion to Gaussian transition matrices over discrete space,
and are able to improve the performance of text diffusion models by properly choos-
ing the transition matrix. DiffusionBERT takes an approach similar to MaskPredict
[11], a parallel-decoding schema for text generation that operates similarly to diffusion
models. Instead of sampling tokens from a categorical distribution when adding noise,
MaskPredict and DiffusionBERT randomly mask-out tokens at varying rates during
training, which are un-masked by the model. During inference, both methods generate
sequences from a sequence of masked tokens, with no need to initialize a noise vector,
which may limit diversity in the generated output.
3 Results
3.1 Overall Performance
We compare DiffER to a variety of template-based, semi-template, and template-free
methods for retrosynthesis prediction with unknown reaction types. We report top-k
accuracy for k ∈{1, 3, 5, 10} following standard procedures. We construct DiffER as an
ensemble of eight diffusion models with various hyperparameters and sample from each
model twenty times with augmented input SMILES according to the work of Zhong
et al. [6]. Predicted reactants sampled from the diffusion models are ranked according
to the number of times they were predicted by the diffusion models. By using multiple
different models with different hyperparameters to predict possible reactants for the
same reaction, we encourage diversity and stability in the output reactants. Ties in
reactant rankings are decided according to a ranked choice voting scheme. Further ties
are broken arbitrarily. Results for the diffusion ensemble model are reported against
baseline algorithms in Table 1, while individual model results are reported in Table 3.
We include a short review of the baselines used for comparison in appendix A.
Notably, DiffER is the best performing model for K = 1 (57.6%) across all
template-free models and is highly competitive for higher values of K, achieving the
second best performance for K = 3, K = 5, and K = 10 (79.0%, 84.1%, and 87.4%,
respectively) for template-free methods behind Root-Aligned SMILES. Comparing to
the state-of-the-art K = 1 result of GDiffRetro [42], DiffER achieves comparable
9

Table 1 Top-K accuracy for tempate-based, semi-template, and template-free
retrosynthesis models. The best performing model of its category for each K is
in bold and the second best model is underlined. DiffER is the best performing
model for K = 1 and the second best model for K = 3, 5 among template-free
methods.
Category
Model
K=1
3
5
10
Template-based
Retrosim [19]
37.3
54.7
63.3
74.1
Neuralsym [1]
44.4
65.3
72.4
78.9
GLN [37]
52.5
69.0
75.6
83.7
LocalRetro [38]
53.4
77.5
85.9
92.4
Semi-template
G2Gs [39]
48.9
67.6
72.5
75.5
GraphRetro [21]
53.7
68.3
72.2
75.5
RetroXpert [40]
50.4
61.1
62.3
63.4
RetroPrime [41]
51.4
70.8
74.0
76.1
G2Retro [20]
53.9
74.6
80.7
86.6
GDiffRetro [42]
58.9
79.1
81.9
-
Template-free
Seq2Seq [5]
37.4
52.4
57.0
61.7
Levenshtein [43]
41.5
48.1
50.0
51.4
GTA [44]
51.1
67.6
74.8
81.6
Graph2SMILES [22]
51.2
66.3
70.4
73.9
Dual-TF [45]
53.3
69.7
73.0
75.0
MEGAN [23]
48.1
70.7
78.4
86.1
Chemformer [7]
54.3
-
62.3
63.0
Retroformer [46]
53.2
71.1
76.6
82.1
Tied transformer [47]
47.1
67.2
73.5
78.5
R-SMILES [6]
56.3
79.2
86.2
91.0
DiffER
57.6
79.0
84.1
87.4
K = 3 performance and out-performs GDiffRetro at higher values of K, indicating
DiffER produces a wider array of possible reactants. Notably, compared to R-SMILES,
both DiffER and GDiffRetro struggle with output diversity, resulting in both diffusion-
based models having decreased performance at high K. The decrease in performance
for these models at high K can likely be attributed to the affinity for diffusion models
to most often sample from the peak of the posterior distribution: despite generating
outputs from multiple models for a diversity of input product SMILES, the output of
DiffER tends to produce just a few candidate reactant sets for each product, produc-
ing the same output molecule numerous times in a different, non-canonical SMILES
form. Indeed, Figure 2 shows a histogram of the number of sample reactions generated
for the test dataset. The diffusion ensemble produces a median number of samples of
5, with 17.9% of reactions producing less than 5 samples, and 57.1% producing less
than 10. Notably, we find that fewer reactants tend to be sampled when DiffER is
correct in its output: reactions where the top-1 reactant is correctly predicted produce
only 8.4 different molecules on average, compared to 12.3 for cases where the top-1
reactant does not match the ground truth. This lack of outputs is less observed in
10

other methods such as R-SMILES which apply beam-search algorithms to sequential
decoders, allowing a greater number of possible reactants to be found.
Fig. 2 A histogram of the number of different molecules output by DiffER for each reaction during
inference.The distribution has a mean of 10.0 and a median of 9. “K=1 is Accurate” indicates if the
most commonly predicted molecule matched the ground-truth reaction.
We further analyze the performance of DiffER across varying reaction types, as
presented in Table 2. Notably, the performance of DiffER is inconsistent among reac-
tion types, which has also been observed in other models [20]. The diffusion ensemble
performs strongly on reactions which operate on ring structures, such as acyclation,
but performs poorly at predicting patented reactants for ring formation, through either
heterocycle formation or C-C bond formation. Compared to G2Retro [20], the best per-
forming semi-template method which offers a similar analysis of their model, DiffER
is significantly more capable of accurately predicting the reactants for protection
reactions [20]. For other reaction types, the overall trends in performance are rather
similar for both DiffER and G2Retro. Both models exhibit their best performance
on functional group addition followed by acyclation, and their worst performance on
heterocycle formation, functional group interconversion, and C-C bond formation.
3.2 Individual Model Performance
We construct DiffER from eight individually trained diffusion models, each of which
uses a different random padding limit N (described in Section 1.3) during training. We
report the individual performance for each of the trained models in Table 3. We com-
pare these results to the DiffER ensemble as well as a baseline diffusion model trained
using direct length prediction, without the length variation used in the individual
DiffER models, also reported in Table 3.
The individual DiffER models greatly improve upon the baseline length prediction
model, demonstrating the effectiveness of our length variation technique. The length
variation technique encourages the individual models to over-predict the length of the
reactant SMILES and then reduce the output SMILES to the correct size using pre-
dictable padding tokens. Meanwhile, the baseline length prediction model drastically
under-performs all other models in terms of accuracy, demonstrating the sensitivity
11

Table 2 Top-K accuracy for DiffER grouped by reaction type. Rows are ordered by
number of reactions of the specified reaction type in descending order.
Reaction Type
K=1
3
5
10
Support
Heteroatom alkylation and arylation
58.6
81.1
86.0
89.3
1,516
Acyclation and related processes
70.4
88.7
92.2
93.9
1,190
Deprotections
53.4
79.8
84.9
87.2
822
C-C bond formation
42.2
64.2
72.0
77.8
567
Reductions
57.2
75.2
81.4
86.2
463
Functional group interconversion
39.0
58.2
66.5
73.1
182
Heterocycle formation
33.3
48.9
55.6
60.0
90
Oxidations
60.2
84.3
88.0
91.6
83
Protections
64.2
83.6
91.0
91.0
67
Functional group addition
78.3
87.0
87.0
87.0
23
of the diffusion models for SMILES string generation to the size of the noise vector.
Both the individual DiffER models and the baseline length prediction model exhibit
low variance in the output reactants, only predicting 3.2 and 3.8 reactants on average,
respectively. Notably, all models still achieves high validity from among the output
molecules, indicating that the individual diffusion models are properly learning not
only the SMILES grammar, but also rules of molecular validity.
When the individual models are ensembled into the complete DiffER model, both
the accuracy and diversity of predicted reactants are significantly improved. The
DiffER ensemble produces on average twice the number of reactants compared to the
individual models, highlighting the impact of the different individual model setups on
the output molecules. By combining multiple models trained on different upper limits
for the length of the SMILES string, we can leverage different weightings of the length
prediction mechanism. When a model is trained on a lower padding limit, more empha-
sis is placed on the length prediction component, as the model is less able to diverge
from the predicted length. When the padding limit is larger, the diffusion model has
more freedom to construct SMILES of varying lengths, but are less informed by the
length prediction. By combining multiple models on various random padding limits,
we improve the diversity and accuracy of the predicted reactants.
3.3 Upper Limits on Performance
In this section, we consider a upper limit on the performance of categorical diffusion
models for chemical retrosynthesis by considering an oracle model which predicts the
length of the output SMILES string with 100% accuracy. This allows us to construct
a diffusion model without needing to incorporate aspects of length prediction or vari-
ability in the size of the output as discussed in Section 1.3. Under the assumption of
the length-predicting oracle, we can initialize input noise to the diffusion model of the
proper size. We run this experiment for a single diffusion model and utilize the same
parameters and repeated sampling during inference as discussed in the experimental
setup.
12

Table 3 Comparison of the DiffER ensemble with the individual models that make up DiffER.
Individual models are notated as DiffER N, where N represents the upper bound on the number of
added padding tokens according to the procedure in Section 1.3. We additionally include single
models with baseline length prediction and oracle length prediction. The individual DiffER models
show significantly higher accuracy than baseline length prediction, but are outperformed by the
DiffER ensemble. The oracle length model drastically outperforms all existing models.
Model
K=1
3
5
10
Sample Validity
Avg. Num. Reactants
DiffER Ensemble
57.6
79.0
84.1
87.4
100.0
10.0
DiffER 20
53.2
70.3
72.9
73.6
100.0
3.2
DiffER 30
55.2
71.5
74.4
75.2
99.9
3.2
DiffER 40
54.6
72.1
74.4
75.3
99.9
3.2
DiffER 50
54.9
71.3
73.7
74.4
100.0
3.2
DiffER 60
55.4
71.7
74.6
75.4
99.9
3.3
DiffER 70
54.3
71.1
73.5
74.4
99.6
3.2
DiffER 80
54.6
71.9
74.4
75.1
99.6
3.3
DiffER 90
54.5
71.6
74.2
74.9
99.8
3.3
Baseline Length
40.4
55.9
58.8
59.9
99.9
3.8
Oracle Length
77.0
88.1
89.5
90.0
99.7
2.8
Results for this experiment are presented in Table 3 in comparison to the DiffER
models and the baseline length prediction diffusion model. The model with oracle
length drastically outperforms DiffER as well as all existing methods for K = 1, 3, 5,
but performs slightly worse than both Root-aligned SMILES and LocalRetro for K =
10. Similarly to DiffER, this can be attributed to a lack of variety in the predicted
output, which is even more extreme for the oracle length model: on average, only 2.8
different reactants are predicted, with a median of just 2 predicted reactants. However,
this lack of diversity is overcome by the oracle model’s high accuracy amongst the
predicted reactants.
This result highlights the importance of accurate length prediction in non-
autoregressive models, particularly in the case of molecular generation with SMILES
strings. While there is some variability in the length of randomly generated SMILES
string for a specific molecule, these variants generally only differ by a length of two or
three, if they differ at all. If the length prediction is off from a viable value by even
one or two, it may force an entirely different molecule to be generated, resulting in
lower reported performance. By including the random length padding in DiffER, we
help combat the diffusion model’s sensitivity to length prediction, but remain far from
the performance of a model with perfect length prediction.
3.4 Case Studies
Our final results are in the form of a case study of four different reactions, the results of
which can be seen in Figure 3. We select four different reactions from the test dataset
to highlight the successes and limitations of the diffusion models. For each reaction,
we report the top-3 reactants sampled from the diffusion ensemble.
13

a)
3aa, desired product
3ab, ground-truth reactants
3ac, top-1 reactants (89.4%)
3ad, top-2 reactants (3.0%)
3ae, top-3 reactants (1.5%)
b)
3ba, desired product
3bb, ground-truth reactants
3bc, top-1 reactants (42.2%)
3bd, top-2 reactants (38.3%)
3be, top-3 reactants (9.7%)
c)
3ca, desired product
3cb, ground-truth reactants
3cc, top-1 reactants (61.3%)
3cd, top-2 reactants (18.7%)
3ce, top-3 reactants (16.7%)
d)
3da, desired product
3db, ground-truth reactants
3dc, top-1 reactants (74.3%)
3dd, top-2 reactants (11.5%)
3de, top-3 reactants (2.7%)
Fig. 3 Top-3 reactants for 4 different target products from the test set compared to patent reactants.
Values in parentheses indicated the percentage of time that reactant was sampled from the diffusion
models. Numbers next to atoms are labels used to refer to the atom. Colored regions indicate where
in the molecule a reaction is expected to occur.
14

Reaction a (Fig. 3a) is a deprotection reaction in the forward direction in which
the trifluoroacetamide protecting group (Fig. 3ab) is reacted with sodium borohydride
in an ethanol solution to produce a primary amine at at the N1 position (Fig. 3aa).
The diffusion ensemble does not predict this reactant, however, instead opting for the
reduction of a nitro group, predicted 89.4% of the time, (Fig. 3ac) at the N1 position.
This is a widely used and viable reaction involving metal catalyzed reduction of the
nitro group using Fe, Zn, Pd or Ni. Similarly, the third ranked choice (Fig. 3ae) is
also a viable option involving a debenzylation reaction which is commonly performed
in the presence of a metal catalyst under a hydrogen atmosphere. The second choice
reaction (Fig. 3ad), however, undergoes amide hydrolysis under harsh conditions such
as a strong acid. While this is also a viable synthesis, a harsh condition such as a
strong acid would likely interact with the tert-butyl ester group leading to unwanted
side products. Notably, the diffusion ensemble does not predict the patented reactant,
primarily predicting the reduction of a nitro group 89.4% of the time. We hypothesize
that this is a result of the specific use-case of the ground-truth reaction, which is
likely used in an industrial setting. Unlike the top-1 (Fig. 3ac) reactant, the ground-
truth (Fig. 3ab) does not use the metal catalyzed reduction of a nitro group (top-1) or
debenzylation (top-3) under a hydrogen atmosphere because it is not a safe reaction on
industrial scale. While the top-1 or top-3 reactants may actually be more common in
an academic lab setting, the ground-truth reactant is likely preferable on a large-scale
industrial setting.
Reaction b (Fig. 3b) is a common reduction reaction of a ketone at C1 (Fig.
3bb) with sodium borohydride in a methanol solution to produce a secondary alcohol
(Fig. 3ba). This same reaction is also predicted by the diffusion models 38.3% of
the time to give the second most popular predicted reactants (Fig. 3bd). The most
popular predicted reactants is an aldehyde and Grignard reagent, predicted 42.2% of
the time, in which the methylmagnesium bromide reacts with the aldehyde at position
C1 (Fig. 3bc) to produce the desired product in the forward reaction. However, the
Grignard reagent (MeMgBr), which is a more nucleophilic reagent, is likely to react
with other functional groups present in the molecule as well, such as the two amides
at C2 and C4 or displace the fluorine at C5 via a nucleophilic aromatic substitution-
like type reaction. In contrast, while the ground-truth/second-most predicted reaction
(Fig. 3bb/3bd) could lead to unwanted products, such as the reduction the carbonyl
groups at C2 and C4, these reactions are less likely to occur compared to the Grignard
reaction under a proper choice of reagents such as sodium borohydride in ethanol.
The top-3 reactant is predicted just 9.7% of the time, and unlike the other proposed
reactants, it does not interact with the C1 carbon. Instead, it disconnects the molecule
at the C1-N3 amide to reveal a C1 carboxylic acid and an N3 amine. (Fig. 3be).
The amide bond can be constructed in the forward reaction using a suitable amide
coupling reaction condition. Yet again, this reaction is viable but would likely produce
unwanted byproducts if other functional groups such as the free secondary alcohol or
the primary amide in the proposed reaction were not protected first.
Reaction c (Fig. 3c) is an ester hydrolysis in which the C1 ester (Fig. 3cb) is reacted
with sodium hydroxide and a water/ethanol mixture to produce a carboxylic acid (Fig.
3ca). This reaction is also predicted by the diffusion ensemble a vast majority of the
15

time, forming 61.3% of the sampled reactants (Fig. 3cc). The top-2 reactant is also a
viable alternative to the ground-truth reactant, just with a ethyl ester at C1 instead
of a methyl ester, which is also a common reaction. Interestingly, the top-3 reactant
sampled by the diffusion models is a Paal-Knorr-type pyrrole synthesis [48, 49] from
an aniline (N2) and the diketone (C3-C6)(Fig. 3cd). The Paal-Knorr reactions usually
involves harsh conditions such as strong acids which may not be compatible with the
ether or the lactam functional groups [48, 49]. Also, the free C1 carboxylic acid may
need to be protected as an ester before the pyrrole synthesis to produce the ground-
truth reactant molecule (Fig. 3cb) which would need to undergo the aforementioned
ester hydrolysis to produce the target molecule. Thus, 3cd could be viewed as one-step
further back in the retrosynthesis chain compared to the ground-truth/top-1 reactant.
Finally, reaction d (Fig. 3d) is a Borch reductive amination [50] between cyclobu-
tanone and a secondary amine in the presence of a reducing agent (Fig. 3db) to form a
tertiary amine with a cyclobutyl group at N1 (Fig. 3db). The ground-truth reactants
are the top-predicted reactants by DiffER, making up 74.3% of the predicted reactants.
Both the second and third most predicted reactants are amine alkylations involving
halides, in which an alkyl halide at C3 (Fig. 3dd/3de) reacts with the N1 amine to
form a tertiary amine. Such N-alkylation reactions are commonly used when reduction
amination does not work, and are valid alternative reactions. However, potential side
reactions such as N-1 overalkylation or intramolecular N-4 alkylation would likely lead
to unwanted byproducts. As such, the ground-truth/top-1 reactants are preferred.
These case studies demonstrate that the diffusion models are capable of learning
a variety of viable reactions for organic synthesis, but like many other models, strug-
gle to understand greater domain requirements or the likelihood of byproducts, as
exemplified in the top-1 reactant for reaction b (Fig. 3bc) and top-2/3 reactants for
reaction d (Fig. 3dd/3de). However, the models also demonstrate significant capabil-
ity to properly utilize common and routine reactions (Fig. 3ac and Fig. 3cc) as well
as more complex reactions such as ring formations (Fig. 3ce). Even in cases where the
ground-truth reactants were not predicted in the top-3 reactants, the diffusion mod-
els produced suitable alternatives used in other reactions (Fig. 3ac) to accomplish the
same goal. This highlights a key difficulty in assessing the accuracy and performance of
models for retrosynthesis; oftentimes, multiple different reactions may be viable, and
the use case for each reaction may depend on information not present in the molecu-
lar structure, such as the case of reaction a. Metrics of ground-truth accuracy do not
capture the viability of a reaction, just that they match the patented reaction, which
may lead to misrepresentation of the model’s capabilities when a suitable alternative
is predicted.
4 Discussions and Conclusions
Our results show that categorical diffusion models offer a competitive alternative
to auto-regressive models for template-free single step retrosynthesis prediction and
are able to outperform many state-of-the-art template-based, semi-template, and
template-free methods on top-1 accuracy, and achieve similar performance to state-of-
the-art models on top-3, top-5, and top-10 accuracy. The proposed DiffER ensemble is
16

able to efficiently sample from the posterior distribution of possible reactant SMILES
strings while maintaining the viability of output SMILES. DiffER is capable of repro-
ducing existing patented reactions as well as proposing new and viable reactants
(Section 3.4).
4.1 Comparison to Other Template-free Methods
Compared to other template-free methods, our diffusion ensemble is able to construct
the entire reactant SMILES string in unison, rather than token by token. Methods
like Chemformer [7] or R-SMILES [6] build the SMILES sequence by predicting a
distribution of probabilities for the next token conditioned on the current sequence and
then selecting the token with the highest probability and adding it to the sequence.
To generate multiple possible reactants, auto-regressive methods generally use beam-
search algorithms to generate multiple possible reactants [7]. Beam-search algorithms
explore multiple options at each step, and only continue exploring the top-k sequences
with the highest probability. In contrast, our diffusion approach directly samples an
entire reactant SMILES string from the approximated posterior distribution of possible
reactants. Thus, the proportion of times a molecule is sampled from DiffER can be
interpreted as a approximation of the posterior probability of that reactant. This offers
an interpretable measure of confidence in the model outputs. However, this form of
sampling also results in limited diversity in the output reactant set: when the model is
highly confident or little diversity exists in the space of possible reactants, only a few
possible reactants may be produced. In contrast, when the model is unsure or there
is a high number of possible reactions, more reactants will be produced. This trade-
off can be disadvantageous in certain circumstances, particularly when there is a low
number of predicted reactants and the top-predicted reactant is unsuitable.
4.2 Comparison to Template-based and Semi-template
Methods
Unlike template-based and semi-template methods, diffusion models do not directly
utilize a static set of reaction templates. Rather, DiffER learn suitable reactions
directly from the data, allowing for greater generalization to reactions that may occur
outside the realm of existing templates. However, this comes at a notable cost in
interpretability: because the diffusion method constructs the proposed reactants from
randomly generated uniform noise, it is not always clear what causes the emergence of
a particular reactant over another possible reactant. A greater analysis of the latent
noise would need to be done to further understand the workings of DiffER. In contrast,
template-based and semi-template based methods directly utilize the existing molec-
ular structure and set of reaction templates when determining where reaction centers
are and which reaction templates apply. This offers a greater level of interpretability
and scientific backing than template-free methods.
4.3 Limitations and Directions of Future Work
Despite the strong performance of DiffER, there are a few notable limitations to the
modeling approach. Firstly, raw diffusion models are highly sensitive to the predicted
17

size of the output. Thus, methods such as our novel variant length padding (Section
1.3) must be employed to diversify target lengths and allow diffusion models to pre-
dict molecules of varying size. Secondly, DiffER suffers from a lack of output variety,
often producing just a few possible reactants. Because diffusion models sample from
an approximated posterior, reactants which the model deems more probable will be
sampled at a higher rate, resulting in fewer reactants being sampled overall for a static
sample size. This is particularly true in cases where the model is confident in its pre-
diction. Finally, the model sometimes produces sub-optimal reactions, such as some of
those displayed in Figure 3. Such reactions often undergo additional reactions along-
side the target reaction, and while the desired product is a possible outcome, additional
byproducts would likely be produced in many cases. These limitations highlight nec-
essary areas of future research for not only categorical diffusion models in chemical
retrosynthesis, but also categorical diffusion models for sequence generation in general:
1. Categorical diffusion models must be able to adapt to differently sized outputs.
Prior work relies on predictable padding tokens to predict differently sized sequences
[9, 10], but this reliance can introduce its own biases due to the prevalence of
padding tokens for shorter sequences. DiffER overcomes reliance on predicting
padding tokens by adding limited variability in the number of possible padding
tokens, with some success; however, results still pale in comparison to a model with
perfect sequence length prediction.
2. Additional techniques to sample categorical diffusion models must be developed
in order to improve sequence diversity and coverage. Compared to the traditional
applications of diffusion models in image generation, molecular SMILES genera-
tion has significantly fewer possible outputs, making the models more likely to
converge to a single prediction. This effect is heightened by the the presence of mul-
tiple SMILES strings mapping to the same molecular structure: while the sequence
itself may be different, the same molecule is produced. We must develop methods
to encourage greater output diversity in the sampled molecules. DiffER attempts
encourages output diversity using an ensemble approach, and while the results are
significantly more diverse than single model approaches, the number of differently
sampled molecules remains low.
The case studies of DiffER additionally demonstrate directions of future research for
retrosynthetic modeling as a whole, many of which are echoed in other work [20]:
3. Machine learning models for retrosynthesis are generally unaware of possible side
products as a result of the generally available training data. Because these models
are most commonly trained on patent reaction datasets, models are not generally
exposed to explicit examples where multiple possible outcomes could occur. Indeed,
the UPSTO-50K dataset has no reactant sets which map to more than one molecule,
limiting the ability of the model to learn that multiple reactions may be possible
for a single set of reactants. To improve the ability of ML models to understand
chemical processes, incorporating additional examples into the training datasets
may be beneficial, and with proper learning techniques, may lead to improved
performance.
18

4. Evaluating the performance of ML models on chemical retrosynthesis most com-
monly relies on a) matching to patented reactions and b) analyzing individual case
studies. Evaluating models by matching to patented reactions limits the discov-
ery of novel techniques and pathways, as models may produce valid results that
do not match patent data. In contrast, evaluating individual case studies is more
adaptable to understanding the model’s true performance, but is a time consuming
process requiring considerable chemical knowledge. To enhance the development
of ML models for chemical retrosynthesis, we must develop new methods of anal-
ysis that take into account the abundance of viable reactions as well as existing
chemical knowledge.
Further research in these four tasks would greatly benefit the application of dif-
fusion models in chemical retrosynthesis, as well as both diffusion modeling and
retrosynthetic prediction models individually.
4.4 Conclusion
Our ensemble of categorical diffusion models provides state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy
as well as competitive top-3, top-5, and top-10 accuracy for template-free methods.
We demonstrate that our ensemble model is capable of not only reproducing patented
reactions, but also producing viable alternative reactions for the same product. Addi-
tionally, we offer insight into the importance of length prediction and length variation
methods when training diffusion models for sequence prediction tasks. Finally, we
include an analysis and discussion of the limitations of our approach. In doing so, we
hope to provide a suitable baseline and open new avenues of exploration for a new
class of template-free retrosynthesis model which differs from current autoregressive
approaches. In future work, we plan to investigate additional methods of length predic-
tion, as well as apply different diffusion sampling techniques to improve the diversity
of sampled molecules. Finally, we plan to continue improving upon the diffusion
model that comprise DiffER, introducing methods such as adaptive noise scheduling
[33] as well as other advancements in categorical diffusion models to improve model
performance.
Declarations
Availability of Data and Materials.
Our data and code is publicly available at
https://github.com/sfcurre/DiffER.
Funding.
This project was made possible, in part, by support from the National Sci-
ence Foundation grant no. IIS-2133650 and the National Library of Medicine grant no.
1R01LM014385. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
funding agency.
Authors’ Contributions.
SC designed, conceptualized, and implemented the
methodology and wrote the manuscript. ZC assisted in reviewing the methodology
and code. DAA assisted in the case study. All authors helped write the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
19

Appendix A
Overview of Retrosynthesis Models
Used for Comparison
We compare and report results against a variety of retrosynthesis models, as seen in
Table 1. Models are grouped according to their model type, which includes template-
based, semi-template, and template-free models.
The template-based models we compare against are:
• Retrosim [19], which applies reaction templates derived from molecules similar to
the target product, and ranks reactions by similarity to existing reactions;
• Neuralsym [1], which utilizes multi-layer perceptrons with molecular fingerprints of
the product to predict applicable reaction templates;
• GLN [37], which uses graph neural networks to learn when and where in molecules
reaction rules can be applied, while scoring the feasibility of the reaction;
• LocalRetro [38], which focuses on the local environment of atoms in the product
and classifies reaction templates on an atomic level.
Each of these methods utilize reaction templates sourced from known reactions. The
primary goals are to 1.) select where in the molecule the reaction will take place and
2.) select which reaction template is applicable.
The semi-template models we compare against are:
• G2Gs [39], which predicts reactions centers and sequentially completes synthons
through the use of a variational graph autoencoder;
• GraphRetro [21], which uses message-passing neural networks to classify reaction
centers and completes synthons by predicting which leaving groups to add from
among a pre-selected set;
• RetroXpert [40], which uses edge-enhanced graph attention networks to predict
reaction centers and completes synthons using a transformer network;
• RetroPrime [41], which uses two separate transformers, one to predict reaction
centers, and the other to map synthons to reactants;
• G2Retro [20], which uses a message passing network to predict three different types
of reaction centers and sequentially adds substructures on to the synthons until
complete reactants are formed.
• GDiffRetro [42], which uses a dual graph molecular representation to train a reaction
center prediction model and uses a conditional diffusion model to complete the
produced synthons.
Each of these methods first divide the product into synthons and then transform
the synthons into complete reactants. The primary goals are to 1.) select where in
the molecule the reaction will take place and 2.) complete synthons formed from the
divided product into complete molecules which will react as needed.
The template-free models we compare against are:
• Seq2Seq [5], which applies sequence-to-sequnece encoder-decoder recurrent neural
networks to predict reactant SMILES from the product SMILES;
20
